Introducing the Sixth Ground Explaining the sixth ground, The Manifest This has four parts: the etymology of the name of the ground and its superiority in wisdom, praise of the perfection of wisdom, explaining reality in terms of seeing profound dependent origination, and a conclusion stating the qualities of the ground.
The etymology of the name of the ground and its superiority in wisdom On Directly Facing he abides in the mind of meditative equipoise and turns to the attributes of perfect buddhahood.
Having attained on the fifth ground a thoroughly pure perfection of meditative absorption, the bodhisattva abides in the most excellent mind of meditative equipoise of the sixth ground — namely, Directly Facing, or The Manifest.
Thus this bodhisattva on the sixth ground, who on this basis sees the profound truth of dependent origination of mere conditionedness, attains true cessation because of his dwelling in the most excellent perfection of wisdom.
Prior to this, such as on the fifth ground, the bodhisattva did not attain such cessation, for he has not reached superiority in the excellent perfection of wisdom.
One cannot attain the cessation through excellence in the first five perfections alone.
This ground is called The Manifest because here, on the basis of superiority in wisdom, the reflection-like ultimate nature of things becomes manifest, because on the fifth ground the bodhisattva took the true paths as his object, and because the bodhisattva now turns to the attributes of perfect buddhahood.
The Explanation of the Commentary interprets the second reason here in terms of the path by which the nonperception of cognition and its object becomes manifest.
However, the description of how “on the fifth ground the bodhisattva took the true path as his object” simply refers to the last of the four truths.
The meaning, in other words, is that the bodhisattva on the fifth ground became versed in the coarse and subtle aspects of the four noble truths, and on the sixth ground, the wisdom versed in the four truths comes to full realization.
The first reason indicates how the wisdom versed in the sequential and reverse order of dependent origination comes to full realization here on this sixth ground. Thus the meaning here is that, on the basis of full realization of these two trainings in wisdom, the four noble truths and dependent origination have come to be manifestly known by the bodhisattva.
Since the three trainings in wisdom are fully realized on this ground; given that the more distinctly superior one’s tranquility the more distinctly superior will be one’s insight; and given how on the fifth ground the bodhisattva attained the most excellent perfection of meditative absorption, so here on the sixth ground, the perfection of wisdom comes to be most excellent.
Therefore it is from this ground onward that the special form of absorption into cessation is attained.
The Precious Garland states: The sixth is called Directly Facing for it directly faces the buddha’s attributes.
Through familiarity with tranquility and insight, one flourishes with the attainment of cessation.
As for its fruitional effect, one will be the king of the Pranirmana gods.
Since he is not outshone by sravakas, he pacifies those with inflated pride.
Pranirmana refers to Nirmanarati.
Praise of the perfection of wisdom
To demonstrate that the collections other than the perfection of wisdom, such as of generosity, depend upon the perfection of wisdom to traverse to the resultant ground, the following is stated: Just as a single man with eyes can easily lead a group of blind men to their desired destination, here too intelligence leads the sightless virtues and guides them to the Conqueror’s state.
Just as, for example, a single man with eyes can easily lead a group of blind men to their desired destination, likewise here too, in the context of the path, intelligence — namely, the perfection of wisdom — leads or thoroughly sustains the virtues such as generosity that are sightless in relation to suchness.
And in this way, wisdom guides them to the resultant Conqueror’s state.
For it is through the perfection of wisdom that one sees without distortion what is a right path and what is not.
The Condensed Perfection of Wisdom too states: Millions and billions of blind people bereft of sight, ignorant of the roads, how can they reach the towns?
Without wisdom these five perfections, lacking sight, cannot touch awakening.
The Diamond Cutter too says: A person with sight who steps into the dark will not see anything. So too view the bodhisattva who has fallen into grasping at real entities while engaging thoroughly in generosity.
O Subhūti, it is thus. When day breaks and the sun shines, the person with eyes will see all the varied forms.
So too view the bodhisattva who has not fallen into grasping at real entities while engaging thoroughly in generosity.
The same applies to morality and so on.
Explaining suchness in terms of seeing profound dependent origination
This has five parts: () promising to explain the profound truth, () identifying those who are vessels for explaining the profound truth, () the way higher qualities ensue if suchness is explained, () urging those who are suitable vessels to listen, and () the way the suchness of dependent origination is expounded.
Promising to explain the profound truth
One might ask, "How is it, as stated above, that when the bodhisattva on the sixth ground sees dependent origination, he sees the suchness of dependence origination in terms merely of this emerging from that?"
To respond to this, the Commentary says: The nature of this is something that does not fall within the purview of those like us whose eyes of intelligence are entirely covered by the dense cataracts of ignorance.
It does fall, however, within the purview of those abiding on the advanced grounds, such as the sixth ground. Therefore, this is not something to be asked of someone like us.
One should pose this question to the buddhas and the bodhisattvas who are free of the cataracts of ignorance, whose eyes of intelligence are anointed with the salve that is the excellent vision of emptiness, which destroys the cataracts of ignorance.
The application of an eye ointment makes one's vision clearer but does not remove the eyes.
Likewise, applying the ointment that is the vision of emptiness makes one's eyes of intelligence clearer, but it does not remove one's eyes of gnosis.
If one understands this point, one will not be tainted by the pitiful disparaging view that there exists no gnosis in the meditative equipoise of āryas.
Now one might ask, "Don’t sutras such as the Mother and the Ten Grounds teach that bodhisattvas who engage in the perfection of wisdom see the suchness of dependent origination?"
"So why don’t you follow the scriptures when you expound it?"
ascertaining the purport of the scriptures is also difficult, so someone like us cannot reveal suchness even by citing the scriptures.
This statement is made from the perspective of teaching suchness independently by oneself. However, to indicate that treatises have been composed by authentic masters who can expound the scriptures without distortion,
and how, on the basis of these, one can ascertain the purport of the scriptures, the text says: One who has realized the utterly profound truth through scripture and through reasoning as well was the noble Nāgārjuna.
So I will expound here his tradition as it appears in his treatises.
Like the bodhisattvas on the sixth ground, one who has realized the utterly profound truth of emptiness was the noble Nāgārjuna.
Having understood the scriptures without distortion, he presented the suchness of all phenomena in extremely clear manner in his Treatise on the Middle Way through scripture and through reasoning as well.
Therefore, just as the treatises of the noble Nāgārjuna present suchness, I, Candrakīrti, will expound here his tradition as it appears in his treatises.
One might ask, “How did the noble Nāgārjuna ascertain the meaning of the definitive scriptures?”
This we know on the authority of the scriptures. The Descent into Laṅkā Sutra states: In the south in the land of coconuts, there will come a monk known as the Glorious who will be called by the name Nāga.
He’ll crush standpoints of existence and nonexistence; he’ll expound in the world my vehicle, this unsurpassed Great Vehicle.
Accomplishing the ground of Perfect Joy, he'll depart to Sukhāvatī.
Thus it was stated that Nāgārjuna will expound the definite vehicle, which is the freedom from the two extremes of existence and nonexistence.
This prophecy refers to the Licchavi youth Lokapriyadarśanā, a contemporary of the Buddha mentioned in the Sublime Golden Light Sutra who would later take birth as Nāgārjuna.
The Great Clouds Sutra states: When it has been four hundred years after my death, this youth will become a monk known by the name of Nāga and will propagate my teaching.
Finally, he will become a king called Jñānākaraprabha in the realm known as Utterly Transparent Light.
These citations establish with certainty, therefore, that there exists in the definitive scriptures an undistorted prophecy of Nāgārjuna.
The Mañjuśrī's Root Realizations Tantra also gives the time of Nāgārjuna's coming and his name as found in the preceding sutra.
There it is stated that he will live six hundred years.
In the Great Drum Sutra it is stated that this Licchavi youth Lokapriyadarśanā will be a monk bearing the name of a teacher and will propagate the teaching when it comes to decline eighty years after the Buddha's death.
He will pass away after a hundred years and will take birth in Sukhāvatī.
This too is accepted by the elder Bodhibhadra and the great Atiśa to be a prophecy of the master and is premised on the account of Licchavi Priyadarśanā sharing the same mental continuum with Nāgārjuna.
In the Great Drum Sutra, the monk is stated to be of the seventh ground.
However, this statement and those cited above cannot be taken as contradicting each other.
For example, some scriptures describe some of the Guardian Kings as stream-enterers, while others describe them as buddhas, so one finds a lot of variations in the scriptures.
Identifying those who are vessels for explaining the profound truth.
As for the definitive treatises, they should also be taught to not just anyone but to those who, because of past habituation, have planted the seed for realizing emptiness.
Others, even if they listen to treatises that present emptiness, will suffer grave injurious consequences because they are plagued with distorted understandings regarding emptiness.
Such grave injurious consequences will transpire like this: some, being unlearned, will forsake emptiness and will depart to the lower realms; some will apprehend the meaning of emptiness of intrinsic existence in a distorted way as "All of these phenomena are nonexistent; they do not exist at all."
They will thus apprehend it mistakenly, and the wrong view disparaging all the phenomena of causes of effects will be first engendered and, held on to, will come to increase further and further.
In relation to this issue, Candrakīrti comments on the following stanza: Emptiness viewed mistakenly dooms those of weak intelligence, like a snake wrongly held or a spell wrongly incanted.
He says that, to not fall to the extreme of disparaging conventional truth, one must not slight the reflection-like karma and its effects; and to not fall to the extreme of reifying ultimate truth, one must see karma and its effects only in things with no intrinsic existence.
To be contrary to these two is described as falling to the extremes of eternalism and nihilism.
Thus Candrakīrti has stated that were one to conceive conditioned things as nonexistent, this would constitute a wrong view.
Now there may be a linguistic level of difference between nonexistent and not being existent; but insofar as conveying the sense of nonexistence is concerned, no matter how carefully one might analyze, no difference whatsoever can be found between these two words.
Also, in commenting on the following lines from Four Hundred Stanzas — One goes to the lower realms alone; those not ordinary go to peace alone — Candrakīrti explains that some who are not sublime and listen to the teaching of selflessness only end up going to the lower realms because of a tendency to either dismiss emptiness or gain distorted understanding of it.
Thus both these responses are described as leading to the lower realms. "
To gain a distorted understanding" is to apprehend the meaning of emptiness in nihilistic terms as nonexistence.
Thus, regarding individuals who lack the power of intelligence to appreciate the extremely subtle points yet possess evident conceit of having such ability, if they engage with fervor in their false determinations of the mere words related to the profound truth that lies clearly beyond their capacity, this will bring grave injurious consequences. Therefore we need to be especially careful with matters such as these.
One may ask, "It seems to be difficult therefore to determine who is appropriate to teach emptiness to and who is not appropriate to teach. So how does one make such a determination?"
To indicate that this can be made on the basis of external signs, the text says:
Even ordinary persons when hearing about emptiness, sheer joy surges again and again within their heart, tears born of such joy fill their eyes, and their hair stands up in their follicles.
Even ordinary persons on the beginner's stage, when hearing an undistorted discourse about emptiness, sheer joy surges again and again within their heart because of hearing such a discourse.
Tears born of such joy fills their eyes, and their hair stands up in their follicles.
Such people have what is called the seed of realizing emptiness, the seed of the nonconceptual gnosis of perfect buddhahood.
It is people such as these who are the perfect vessels for this teaching by a well-versed master.
So to them you should teach the sublime ultimate truth, the truth whose characteristics will be explained below.
The point here is that if one sees these physical signs emerge on the basis of two convergent facts — that the person hears the discourse on emptiness and that he understands what is being heard — then such signs indicate unmistakenly that the person is a suitable vessel.
In contrast, if the person does not understand the meaning, or even if he does, if the signs do not arise, one cannot determine for the time being that he is a suitable vessel for the profound truth.
Even so, if he adheres to the dictates of his sublime teachers, such a person may in the future become a suitable vessel to deposit numerous new potencies for realizing emptiness.
The way higher qualities ensue if suchness is expounded For them the ensuing qualities will come to birth. They will revere those who aspire to perfect awakening.
Teaching emptiness to the vessels described above will not be fruitless.
Why?
Not only will such listeners not be saddled with the injurious consequences of distorted apprehension of emptiness, for them the ensuing qualities that result from listening to the view of emptiness will come to birth.
How do these come about?
These suitable vessels will relate to hearing the view of emptiness like finding a treasure; and so that this view does not degenerate in other lives, adopting perfect morality, they will always abide by it.
They will do so by reflecting, “If, due to moral degeneration, I were to fall into the lower realms, the continuity of the view of emptiness will be broken.” Thus they will adopt moral discipline and guard it without degeneration.
Becoming morally degenerate does not require first adopting a moral code; even committing those acts that are naturally reprehensible, which are contrary to virtue, constitutes moral degeneration.
They will further reflect, “Even if, because of observing morality, I am born in the higher realms, I may become poor and bereft of the conditions for sustenance, such as food, drink, medicine, and clothing, and devoted to seeking these, the continuity of my hearing the view of emptiness and meditating on its meaning will be broken.”
Thus, as explained before, they will practice generosity in relation to the higher and lower fields.
Reflecting “It is the view of emptiness sustained by great compassion that will lead to buddhahood and not otherwise,” they will cultivate the habit of great compassion, which is the root.
Reflecting, "Through anger one goes to the lower realms, destroys one's virtues, and acquires an extremely unappealing countenance, and because of these the āryas will not be pleased," they will practice forbearance.
Given that morality and so on that are not dedicated repeatedly to a buddha's omniscience do not become causes for buddhahood, and that uninterrupted continuity of their fruits in the form of embodiments and material resources will fail to emerge, they will dedicate thoroughly their virtue of morality and so on to freedom from cyclic existence for all beings.
And seeing that others like śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas cannot teach the profound dependent origination like bodhisattvas, they will come to tremendously revere the bodhisattvas who aspire to perfect awakening.
For those of the Great Vehicle whose understanding of the view of emptiness has penetrated the essential point, a perfect understanding as described above will arise, and they will become reverential toward cultivating the vast aspects of the path. Such people would certainly be objects worthy of the highest acclaim.
The Commentary on the Awakening Mind states: Those who understand this emptiness of phenomena and also conform to the law of karma and its results: that is more amazing than amazing! That is more wondrous than wondrous!
Such things will come to pass for those who have the following two characteristics: () They have shunned the two faults, which are forsaking emptiness by being either of the two kinds of unsuitable vessels - one that lacks admiration for the teaching and the other that seems to admire it but concludes that reason negates the entire world of cause and effect - and () they have come to realize that, on the basis of the view of emptiness as the absence of intrinsic existence, all presentations [such as causality] are all the more tenable.
Otherwise, when one allegedly engages from the standpoint of someone who has found the view, the entire presentation of karma and its effects, such as morality, risks being reduced to something akin to counting the ridges of a rabbit's horn.
One might come to hold the view that "All such presentations [of morality and so on] are for the benefit of those who have not understood the definitive meaning but are irrelevant for someone who has understood the definitive meaning.
They are nothing but conceptual fabrications, and all thinking constitutes grasping at signs in the form of clinging to true existence. Thus, like the Chinese monk Heshang Moheyan, one will come to undermine all the virtues.
Some might say that for now, one does need to observe the ethical norms from the standpoint of delusory perception.
Now, if one does distinguish two kinds of thinking — one that grasps at true existence and one that does not — then the assertion that reason negating intrinsic existence negates everything becomes meaningless chatter.
If one recognizes no such differentiation of two types of thoughts, then the two categories of realization — those pertaining to the view of emptiness and those pertaining to the aspect of altruistic conduct — will each come to undermine the other, just like heat and cold.
Furthermore, it will become impossible to define the delusory perspective the standpoint from which things are posited, that which posits, and what are being posited. So to speak in such terms amounts to nothing but a conjuration in the dark.
Such protagonists in fact uphold the very standpoint critiqued by the treatises referred to above.
Urging those who are suitable vessels to listen
Gaining mastery of ways profound and vast,
such persons will gradually attain the ground of Perfect Joy. So all those who thus aspire, pray listen to this path. .b–d
Such people, while gaining mastery of ways profound and vast as described above on the ordinary ground, will definitely gather the collections of virtues of both profound and vast aspects for a long time without interruption. Because of this, such persons will gradually attain the ground of Perfect Joy.
So all those who thus aspire to attain the ground of Perfect Joy, pray listen to this profound path that will be presented below. In this way they are being urged here.
The Commentary on the Four Hundred Stanzas says: If he grows to esteem the discourse on emptiness of intrinsic existence, then by cultivating conditions conducive to it, his behavior will help increase his admiration for emptiness.
His compassion will be great, he will repay the kindness of the Blessed Tathāgata, and he will have the wish to completely relinquish the causes that obstruct the sublime Dharma — namely, the causes of the great abyss.
He will consider the destitute and will give away even those things that are hard to give.
He will gather others as well through the four means of attraction.
So, with all your efforts, certainly reveal this sublime teaching to those who are the vessels of sublime Dharma.
So, as the above teaches, one should reveal this discourse with great effort.
This is, of course, to those who are free of the two faults of being an unsuitable vessel.
Even to those who have admiration but do not understand it exactly as it is, one should explain this teaching skillfully so that it does not undermine their conviction in dependent origination.
For a speaker who is most learned, to teach his listeners, including those at least minimally qualified as suitable vessels, is a deed of great merit.
For example, the Compendium of Sutras states: He who aspires for the profound teaching collects all the merit, for he will, until buddhahood is attained, accomplish all the mundane and supramundane perfect factors.
This is spoken in the Gift of Youth Ratna Sutra: “O Mañjuśrī, compared to a bodhisattva bereft of skillful means who engages in the six perfections for a hundred or thousand eons, someone who listens to this class of teaching on emptiness even with doubts will generate far more merit.
If this is so, what need is there to speak of listening to it without doubt.
What need is there too to speak of someone who writes it out in words and transmits it through reading, upholds it, and teaches it extensively to others as well?
In the Diamond Cutter too it says: The Blessed One stated, "Subhūti, what do you think?"
Say, for example, there were banks of the river Ganges equal in number to the number of grains of sand that exist on the banks of the Ganges, will this be a great number of grains of sand?
"If the grains of sand on the banks of the Ganges are so numerous, what need is there to speak of the grains of sands of that many banks of the Ganges?"
replied Subhūti.
To this the Blessed One said, “O Subhūti, I will share this with you.
Understand thus.
Say a man or a woman fills worlds equal in number to the grains of sand on the banks of the river Ganges with seven types of precious materials and offers these to the tathāgatas.
Will that man or woman generate, on that basis, a vast amount of merit?
O Blessed One, replied Subhūti, yes, this will be a vast amount.
O Tathāgata, this will indeed be a vast amount.
Then the Blessed One said, One who upholds even a stanza of four lines of this class of teaching and reveals it to others as well will generate even greater merit.
In the Treasury of Tathāgatas Sutra too, after enumerating the ten great nonvirtues, it states that if someone who possesses these were to enter the teaching of selflessness with faith and aspiration to understand all phenomena as being primordially pure, such a sentient being will not go to the lower realms.
Also the Chapter on Defeating the Māras says A monk who understands all phenomena to be utterly tamed understands even the initial thresholds of misdeeds to be devoid of intrinsic existence and dispels the remorse borne of the occurrence of misdeeds and thus does not consolidate it.
Because of this, if this act subdues even the heinous deeds, what need is there to speak of the minor deeds — erroneous practices of the rites and moral discipline?
In the Ajātaśatru Sutra it says If someone who has committed a heinous act hears this teaching and engages with it and aspires for it, I do not speak of his karmic deed as a karmic obscuration.
Such are the benefits of teaching and listening to the profound truth; these are also the benefits of aspiring for and contemplating it on other occasions.
Now, to optimize the benefits received from expounding the profound truth, two conditions must be present: one’s motivation must be pure through not seeking gifts, honor, or fame, and one must not misconstrue the meaning of the teaching one is expounding but explain it without distortion.
For it has been said that if one expounds on the basis of both or either of these two faults, this will impede the gathering of great stores of merit.
For example, the master Vasubandhu says: Therefore, those who expound the Dharma inaccurately, and expound it with afflicted mind yearning for gifts, honor, and fame, they will undermine their own great store of merit.
The same is true here as well.
Since the listener too must have a pure motivation and not misconstrue the meaning, both teacher and student should ensure that at least a minimum of qualifications is present when teaching and listening.
Identifying the Object of Negation The way the suchness of dependent origination is expounded
This has three sections: how this is presented in the perfect scriptures, how the meaning of the scriptures is established by reason, and enumerations of emptiness: the established conclusion.
How this is presented in the perfect scriptures
The first has two parts: citations showing how it was taught in the scriptures and identifying the forces opposing the understanding of suchness.
Citations showing how it was taught in the scriptures
Here in the Ten Grounds Sutra it states: When the bodhisattva on the fifth ground enters the sixth ground, he does so by means of ten perfect equanimities with respect to phenomena.
What are these ten?
They are the perfect equanimity of all phenomena in their absence of signs; the perfect equanimity of all phenomena in their absence of defining characteristics, likewise in their absence of birth, in being unborn, in being void, in their primordial purity, and in their freedom from elaborations; the perfect equanimity in their absence of affirmation and rejection; the perfect equanimity of all phenomena in their resemblance to illusions, to dreams, to mirages, to echoes, to reflections of the moon in water, to mirror images, and to conjurations; and the perfect equanimity of all phenomena in their absence of the duality of real and unreal.
When he realizes the nature of all phenomena in such terms, because of his sharp and apposite forbearance, he will attain the sixth ground — namely, The Manifest.
"Likewise" indicates that the phrase “all phenomena” must be extended up to “in their absence of affirmation and rejection.”
These two are a single perfect equanimity.
The equanimities in terms of phenomena’s resemblance to the seven similes such as illusions should be taken as one perfect equanimity.
And the last two should also be considered as a single perfect equanimity.
There seems to be some variance in the identity of the ten perfect equanimities even between the Commentary on the Ten Grounds Sutra and the Bodhisattva Grounds.
Since those two texts differ in their interpretation of emptiness from this tradition, the ten perfect equanimities are here explained in a manner distinct from them.
Of these, the first is that all phenomena are equal insofar as all these appearances of diverse signs do not exist from the perspective of the ārya’s meditative equipoise.
The second is the equanimity of all phenomena insofar as they are all devoid of existence by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics.
These two represent a general presentation.
The remaining eight present particular variations of the very truth thus explained in general.
For instance, the “absence of birth” is from the perspective of the future, and “unborn” is from that of another temporal standpoint.
That all phenomena are equanimous or equal must be understood in the context of other as well.
"Being void" refers to being devoid of “what is to be born” and “what is already born.”
These, in turn, must be understood in the sense of being “absent” of existence qualified by intrinsic characteristics, as stated in context of the second perfect equanimity.
This fact too is not something constructed by scripture or reason; rather, they remain so as primordially pure.
This is the sixth.
The seventh, the absence of dualistic elaboration, should be correlated to the first equanimity, while the freedom of elaboration of language and conceptualization should be correlated to the second equanimity.
The same equanimity statement should be applied to the eighth as well.
The ninth consists of numerous analogies that help ascertain the truth as explained above.
The tenth refers to the fact that whatever the phenomenon, all are the same in lacking intrinsic existence in terms of the duality of real versus unreal. “
Sharp” refers to swift intelligence, while “apposite” refers to forbearance toward the unborn nature commensurate with that of the eighth ground.
There appears to be various types of apposite forbearance depending upon the context.
Although many scriptures teach the suchness of phenomena, the context here is the explanation of how the wisdom of the sixth ground realizes suchness.
Thus the citation here is from the scripture that states how the bodhisattva enters the sixth ground by means of ten perfect equanimities.
Identifying the forces opposing the understanding of suchness
In setting forth all phenomena as devoid of true existence, if one does not understand well what constitutes true existence and what constitutes grasping at true existence, one’s view of emptiness will certainly go astray.
Here, Guide to the Bodhisattva Way states: Without touching upon the imputed entity, the absence of its reality cannot be grasped.
Thus if the imputed entity — namely, the generic concept of “what is to be negated” — does not appear clearly to one’s mind, it is said that one will not be able to pinpoint the absence of that object of negation.
Therefore, if a clear sense of what is the purported true existence — that which is said not to exist — as well as what phenomena are understood to be empty of — the object to be negated — does not arise in one’s mind, it would be impossible to ascertain clearly the nature of the absence of true existence as well as the nature of emptiness.
It is not enough to have identified true existence as postulated by proponents of philosophical tenets or their corresponding apprehensions of true existence.
It is most essential, therefore, to have identified well the innate grasping at true existence — which persists since beginningless time and is present both in those whose minds are tempered by philosophical tenets and in those whose minds are not thus tempered — as well as the purported true existence grasped at by such an innate mind.
Without identifying these, one might engage in eliminating the object of negation through reasoning, but this would not undermine whatsoever the clinging to true existence that persists since beginningless time, and thus miss the entire purpose at hand.
Now to do this, we must first identify the grasping at true existence that lies within our own mind and understand how the various Madhyamaka reasonings function directly and indirectly to eradicate its object.
Negation and affirmation that are directed solely outward will have scant benefit.
On a related note, if one can understand the identification of what is to be negated according to the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka and Svātantrika Madhyamaka, one will be able to appreciate the fine differences in their views.
Hence, this presentation has two parts: identifying grasping at true existence according to the Svātantrika Madhyamaka standpoint and identifying grasping at true existence according to the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka standpoint.
Identifying grasping at true existence according to the Svātantrika Madhyamaka standpoint
This has three parts: identifying true existence and grasping at true existence, presenting truth and falsity within the context of worldly convention through the analogy of magical illusion, and explaining the analogy by relating it to the actual referent.
Identifying true existence and grasping at true existence
Other reliable treatises of Svātantrika make no clear identification of the object of negation, but Kamalaśīla’s Light of the Middle Way presents a criterion for conventional existence, the contrary of which can be recognized as constituting the criterion of ultimate or true existence.
Here is what the text says: Though things do not possess essence in reality, the erroneous mind reifies them contrary to their nature.
This [erroneous mind] is called the conventional [saṃvṛti, literally, “concealer”] because, as it were, it obscures suchness or, through it, suchness is covered over.
As such the sutra states: The arising of things is on the conventional; on the ultimate there is no intrinsic nature.
That which is mistaken toward no intrinsic nature is held to be a concealer of the perfect truth.
Because it originates from this erroneous mind, what it reveals — namely, all the false things being perceived — are stated to be conventional only.
This erroneous mind, in turn, comes about from the ripening of a habitual propensity to err that exists since beginningless time.
That mind reveals entities to all sentient beings as if they were real in nature, and this they all come to perceive.
Therefore all things that are false in their nature and are posited by virtue of the power of the minds of sentient beings are said to exist only conventionally.
Up to “This erroneous mind is” indicates how beings mistakenly ascribe ultimate existence to what are ultimately devoid of intrinsic nature.
From “conventional” up to “covered over” presents the meaning of the phrase “concealer of final truth”; here “conventional” is taken to be the concealer in that it conceals the final truth.Because it originates from grasping at true existence, that which sees what that grasping reveals as truly existent is a thought, not a sensory cognition.
The commentary to the Two Truths states that true existence, which is the object of negation, does not appear to sensory perceptions, and this remains true here as well.
From “This erroneous mind, in turn,” up to “beginningless time” presents this grasping at true existence to be innate.
Thus “to all living beings” is mentioned.
As for the minds of these living beings, this is not only conceptual thoughts; it also includes the nonconceptual cognitions.
Things come to be posited by virtue of these two classes of consciousness.
That things do not exist on the ultimate level and that these false entities exist only on the conventional level is the meaning of the line “The arising of things is conventional.”
The meaning here, however, is not that they exist as the concealer — as the grasping at true existence.
Understood thus, an existence through its own objective mode of being and not posited in dependence on being perceived by cognitions or posited by virtue of the power of cognitions constitutes true, ultimate, and final existence.
And grasping at this is the innate grasping at true existence.
One might ask, “If this is so, how do you explain this statement in the Light of the Middle Way: ‘To say that ultimately there is no arising is to say that they [arising, disintegration, and so on] are not established as such by perfect cognition’?
For, through implication, this defines ultimate existence and arising in terms of being established as arising and as existence by a rational cognition of suchness?
Reply: Yes, this is true. But you must understand that, with respect to the proviso “ultimately,” there are two senses of the term ultimate.
One is where rational cognition of emptiness in the form of the threefold wisdom of hearing, reflection, and meditation are characterized as “ultimate”; phenomena are not established by such cognitions in the manner defined above.
The other sense of ultimate is where existence through a thing’s own objective mode of being and not by virtue of the power of cognitions is defined as “ultimate existence.”
Of these two, the first ultimate and something established from its perspective do exist, while it is impossible for the second ultimate and something established from its perspective to exist.
Therefore, while existing ultimately in the second sense does imply existing ultimately in the first sense, grasping in terms of the first sense of ultimate existence does not constitute innate grasping at true existence.
For innate grasping at true existence requires grasping at things in the second sense of ultimate existence.
Failing to draw this distinction, many appeared who considered “that which is capable of withstanding reasoned analysis” or “an entity capable of withstanding such analysis” to be the measure of the object of negation.
Numerous errors have apparently been made because of this.
For instance, some assert that ultimate truth is not a knowable phenomenon; others view it as truly existent.
In contrast, if one appreciates well the above distinction, one will come to appreciate such crucial points as there being no contradiction between the statements “things do not exist through their own essential mode of being or ultimately” and yet “the ultimate nature of things does exist” and to speak of this as constituting the essential mode of being and the ultimate.
The analogy of magical illusion has been hailed as a way of making one understand how something exists by virtue of being posited by the power of the mind and how something exists without being posited in such a manner.
When the magician conjures a horse or an elephant from pebbles, sticks, and so on, three types of people are present — the magician himself, the spectators whose eyes are affected, and the spectators whose eyes are unaffected.
In the first case, the horse or elephant is perceived but not apprehended; in the second case, it is both perceived and apprehended; while in the third case, there is neither perception nor apprehension of a horse or an elephant.
Now, when the basis for conjuring the illusion is perceived as a horse or an elephant — unlike in mistaking a rope for a snake, where one can say that the rope is a snake for that perception but not in general — one cannot say that the basis for conjuring the illusion appears as a horse or an elephant merely to an erroneous cognition but that, in general, there is no such appearance.
For even without such qualification, one has to accept that are being perceived as a horse or an elephant.
Were this not so, then no perceptual error in relation to appearance would be possible.
Therefore one can posit that the basis for conjuring an illusion does appear as a horse or an elephant. Now, for the magician, the illusory elephant or horse is posited from the point of view of how it appears to an erroneous perception.
It is not posited, however, from the point of view of the basis for conjuring the illusion.
From the perspective of the spectators, however, the appearance of a horse or an elephant does not seem to be posited through the power of the mind; rather, they apprehend a real horse or elephant fully occupying space on the very spot where it is being perceived.
This is how, on the basis of the analogy, one apprehends something to be posited through the power of the mind or not posited through it.
So when an appearance is perceived in relation to a given basis, there are two possibilities — one where what appears constitutes its mode of existence as perceived and another where it does not.
By comprehending this point well, one will be able to avoid the confusion that arises from the thought “Since objects are established by valid cognitions, and since valid cognitions are themselves cognitive states, their establishment of the objects would constitute the objects being posited through the power of the cognitions.
In that case, true existence will be negated even in the system of the Buddhist essentialists.”
One will thus be able to disentangle the conflation of these two senses. For the sense in which objects are said to be defined by valid cognition refers to the two classes of objects being cognized by valid cognition. So this sense is very different from the previous sense of the objects being posited by virtue of the power of cognitions.
According to Yogācāra-Madhyamaka, the appearance of the illusion is established by reflexive awareness.
According to Svātantrika Madhyamaka, which accepts external reality, it is established by sensory perception that apprehends either the basis, such as the environs, or the empty space.
That it does not exist in the way it is perceived is established through such reasoning as “If it did exist in such a manner, this would be seen by unaffected eyes as well, but that is not the case.”
When, through negation such as this, there is the convergence of its appearance as such and it being empty of such, then, from the perspective of ordinary conventional cognition that is not seeped in philosophical standpoints, such an illusion is established to be a falsehood.
This cognition of falsehood and the cognition that establishes a mirror image to be empty of what it appears to be, therefore, do not constitute either coarse or subtle levels of rational cognition pertaining to suchness.
Even with respect to true existence from the perspective of ordinary conventional cognition generally, when there is the appearance of a thing as being something, then it being empty of such a thing simply does not occur.
Similarly, when it is found to be empty of being such a thing, its appearance as such just does not occur.
Where there is indeed the convergence of the two, such things are false even from the perspective of ordinary conventional cognition.
Explaining the analogy by relating it to the actual referent
Just like those spectators whose eyes have been affected, when outer and inner phenomena appear as truly existent, sentient beings grasp at these phenomena not as posited by virtue of the power of the mind but as existing in their own right.
This is the innate grasping at true existence that has persisted since beginningless time.
Compared to the mind grasping at the object of negation as defined by Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka, this presentation of Svātantrika Madhyamaka is very coarse and therefore does not constitute the subtle innate grasping at true existence.
Nevertheless, when true existence as conceived by such grasping has been negated through reasoning, then just like the magician, one will no longer apprehend outer and inner phenomena as possessing a mode of existence not posited by cognitions; one will come to understand them as existing merely as established by virtue of the power of cognitions.
And it is those things established by virtue of the power of cognitions and not invalidated by valid cognitions that are accepted to possess conventional existence.
It’s not the case that whatever the mind posits is accepted to have conventional existence.
Suppose our cognition posits the arising of a sprout from its seed; this does not contradict the sprouts arising from their seeds on their own part as well.
Similarly, things that are the basis for conjuring an illusion do appear, on their part too, as a horse or elephant.
By this one should understand the way all phenomena exist on the conventional level.
Since even the ultimate nature is established by virtue of its appearance to the cognition that perceives it, it does not stand as a counterexample to the entailment of conventional existence.
Therefore the following is definitely not the sense in which the analogy of illusion is to be understood: "Just as an illusion appears as a horse or an elephant but is empty of them, all things, such as a vase, appear as a vase and so on but are devoid of vases and so on."
For if that were so, there could be nothing that could be said to be itself.
Furthermore, the parallels being drawn between the analogy and its referent here would be in terms of their appearance as such but not in terms of their actuality.
Now, at the point when the nonconceptual gnosis of meditative equipoise has arisen, within that perspective all dualistic appearances are pacified. This is analogous to those spectators who, because their eyes are unaffected, have neither the perception nor the apprehension of the illusion.
Given that there will be no presentation of the unique style of negation through reasoning by Svātantrika Madhyamaka in the subsequent sections, I will briefly explain here, in a manner easy to comprehend, how phenomena would come to be perceived as illusion-like according to that tradition.
Determining that all knowables are subsumed by the twofold classification into the conditioned and the unconditioned, conditioned things are further differentiated into material and not material.
Based on this, one then refutes the notion that matter is composed of particles that are partless in the sense of having no directional parts, such as east and so on, and the notion that mental phenomena are composed of a series of indivisible points devoid of temporal parts, such as preceding and subsequent moments.
These refutations one should understand as explained elsewhere.
One establishes in this way the logical entailment that all conditioned things are composed of parts.
Next, if the parts and the bearer of the parts are distinct entities, they will then become unrelated, which is rejected; thus they are shown to be a single entity.
Now at this point, however much one directs one's thought to a given thing, it becomes undeniable that parts and their bearer, though being a single entity, appear as if they are distinct.
Like a magician's illusion, the convergence of two facts is established: the appearance of things as something and their emptiness of it.
This is not a problem for a false mode of existence posited through our cognition.
But such a convergence becomes untenable if we are speaking of an objective mode of existence not posited by virtue of its perception in cognition.
For if something were to possess true existence as defined earlier, there could be no disparity between the way the thing actually is and the way it appears.
For if something is truly existent, it must remain so invariably, shunning any aspect of falsehood.
Furthermore, the cognition that perceives the parts and their bearer as distinct entities would have to be veridical, which would invalidate their being one entity.
Once this absence of true existence of conditioned things is established, one can also negate, with the very same reasoning, the true existence of the unconditioned.
For example, one must admit that even unconditioned space pervades some material objects, and thus there must be parts that pervade the east and parts that extend in other directions.
Likewise, suchness too has numerous directional parts in terms of its extension as well as distinct parts, those realized by distinct preceding and subsequent moments of cognition.
The same is also true of other unconditioned phenomena.
Now, since parts and their bearer cannot be of different entities, they are of one entity.
Furthermore, a disparity between appearance and reality is permissible in something that is false but not in something that is truly existent.
So when one engages in the foregoing refutations, one will establish that all phenomena lack true existence.
This is the approach of Śāntarakṣita and his spiritual heir Kamalaśīla.
Those who confine their analysis of parts and wholes to conditioned things alone suffer from a weak intellect.
Now there is indeed a sense of falsehood that is well known even to a mind not informed by philosophical thinking, but this is not the same sense of falsehood being proposed here by the Madhyamaka. Therefore, although things can be posited by such a mind, this is only in the sense acknowledged within such a perspective.
This would not be accepted by the Madhyamaka to exhaust the meaning of “being posited by the mind.”
In view of this, although there is no mode of existence that is not posited by virtue of being perceived by the mind, it is not a contradiction in this tradition for there to be a mode of existence that is posited by virtue of being perceived by the mind yet is not a mere nominal designation.
Given this, a great deal of difference can be perceived by the mind between the objects of negation of the two Madhyamaka schools.
I have offered these explanations here seeing that the eyes of people today will come to be excellently opened to the view if they are first well led through the identification of what constitutes true existence and what constitutes grasping at true existence according to this system, including a brief introduction to their reasoning negating them, and are then presented with the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka system.
Identifying grasping at true existence according to the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka standpoint
If one understands how, according to this system, phenomena are posited through mere conceptualization, one can then easily recognize how its opposite would constitute grasping at true existence.
This presentation has two parts: how phenomena are posited through conceptualization and presenting grasping at true existence, the contrary apprehension.
How phenomena are posited through conceptualization
The Questions of Upāli states: The flowers with their open petals that delight so many minds, the supreme gold mansions resplendent and attractive — none of these has a creator; they’re posited through the power of conception.
Through conceptualization the world is imputed.
Thus phenomena are taught to be posited through the power of conceptualization.
On many other occasions phenomena are described as mere imputations of thought and as posited by virtue of the power of conceptualization.
In Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning it says: The buddhas have stated that the world is conditioned by ignorance, so why would it be unreasonable to say this world is conceptualization?
The commentary explains this verse to mean that the world is a mere conceptual imputation and does not exist in its own right.
Four Hundred Stanzas also says: If without conceptualization attachment and so on do not exist at all, what intelligent person would grasp something as perfectly real and as conception?
In its commentary too one reads: Those things that exist only because of the presence of conceptualization and have no existence when there is no conception are without doubt like the snake conceived upon a coiled rope — definitely not established in their own right.
"Perfectly real" means something existing in its own right, and “conceptualization” arises in relation to it.
The statement in this commentary about how attachment and so on are like the imputation of a snake upon a rope merely presents them as examples.
The statement in fact shows how all phenomena are posited by conceptualization just like a snake conceived on the basis of a rope.
For instance, when a rope that looks like a snake because of its multicolored pattern and the manner in which it is coiled is encountered in a poorly lit area, the thought “This is a snake” may arise.
At that moment, there is not the slightest objective basis on the part of the rope — either in aggregate or in its parts — that can be identified as an instance of a snake.
Therefore this snake is a mere conceptual imputation.
Similarly, when the thought “I am” arises in dependence upon the aggregates, there is not even the slightest basis on the part of the aggregates — whether as a collection of earlier and latter continua or as collection of simultaneous factors and parts — that can be posited as an instance of this “I.” This will be explained more extensively below.
For this reason and because there is not even a slightest entity that is distinct from the aggregates — whether in terms of their parts or their bearer — that can be taken to be the basis of this “I”, so this “I” is posited through mere conception in dependence upon the aggregates; it has no existence in its own right.
This is stated in the Precious Garland as well: The individual is not the earth or the water; he is not the fire, not wind, nor space; he is not the consciousness; so if he is not all these, where then is the individual apart from these?
Here “individual” is the person, the sentient being, the “I,” or the self.
"Not the earth" and so on up to “not the consciousness” refutes the postulation of the six elements of the sentient being, which are its parts, as constituting the person, while “not all these” negates postulating the sum of these elements as the person.
The final line refutes postulating something that is a different entity from these elements as the person.
Nevertheless, it is not the case that one does not accept the existence of the person at all; nor does one accept foundation consciousness and so on as the person.
Therefore the noble Nāgārjuna too accepts [the nature and existence of the person] exactly as explained by the Commentary’s author.
If one understands how the person is posited through conception like this, one will understand how all other phenomena are posited through conceptualization in exactly the same way.
The King of Meditations Sutra says: What you’ve discerned with respect to the self, you must extend that thought to everything.
And in the noble Condensed Perfection of Wisdom it says: Just as with the self, understand all sentient beings; just as with sentient beings, understand all phenomena.
The Precious Garland too says this clearly in the following: Since the person is a composite of six elements, it has no absolute existence.
And likewise, since each of the elements is in turn a composite, they too have no absolute existence.
The point of the first line is to state the reason “Because the person is designated in dependence on the collection of the six elements.”
The point of the third and the fourth lines is to state that, since it is impossible for something not to consist of parts and a bearer of the parts, each element is, in turn, designated in dependence on the collection of many constitutive parts.
Therefore they do not exist on the level of absolute reality or by virtue of their own essence.
Furthermore, if they are designated in dependence on the collection of their constitutive parts, neither the parts nor the bearer of the parts can be the thing itself, yet something of different entity from these cannot be the thing either.
Now, insofar as the way vase and so on are conceptually posited, they are, in that respect at least, exactly similar to a snake imputed on the basis of a rope.
However, between the vase and so on on the one hand and the rope-snake on the other, the two cases are entirely different when it comes to whether they exist, whether they are capable of effective functions, and so on.
This is because there is a clear distinction between the two in whether their conventions remain essential for everyday transaction and whether the usage of such conventions is susceptible to invalidation.
That everyday transactions remain tenable in this world posited through conceptualization represents, among the commentators of the words and meaning of the Madhyamaka treatises, a unique tradition of interpreting the noble Nāgārjuna and his son by the three masters — Buddhapālita, Śāntideva, and this master Candrakīrti.
This issue of how everyday translations remain possible in a world posited through conception is indeed the most difficult point of the final view of the Middle Way.
Understood thus, then as the Precious Garland states,
nothing whatsoever, not even the mere names, exist on the ultimate level, and on the conventional level too, nothing exists other than what are posited as mere designations through conventions such as names:
Because material things are mere names, the space too is a mere name; how can there be matter with no elements?
Therefore mere names too do not exist.
Feelings, discriminations, mental formations, and consciousness — contemplate these just like the elements or the self.
Therefore the six elements have no selfhood.
And Apart from being designated by conventions, how could there be a world in reality as either existent or nonexistent?
If one understands these well, one will soundly comprehend how phenomena are necessarily posited through dependence, how, by the very virtue of their being dependently designated and having arisen through dependence, they have no existence in their own right, how they do not possess an independent nature, something not posited through the power of some other conventions, and no matter the phenomenon, when it is posited as existent, it is done so without analysis — without seeking a true referent behind the designation.
Grasping at true existence, the contrary apprehension
Grasping at things as existent as described above — not posited by the power of conventions such as name alone — constitutes innate grasping at things as “true,” “ultimate,” or “absolute existence,” “existence by virtue of an essential nature,” “existence through intrinsic characteristic,” or “intrinsic existence.”
And the object grasped at by such a mind is, hypothetically speaking, the measure of true existence.
It is the case here as well that one needs to be cognizant of there being two senses of the term ultimate when qualifying the object of negation with the proviso “ultimately.”
Although the proponents of Svātantrika Madhyamaka maintain existence in terms of the first three — true existence and so on — to be impossible, they nonetheless accept, on the conventional level, the remaining other three — “existing by virtue of an essential nature” and so on.
Personally, I see this Svātantrika standpoint to be an example of great skillful means to help guide those who are, for the time being, not capable of easily realizing the extremely subtle view of suchness.
Thus “the purported reality of phenomena, not dependent upon some other factor namely, the convention-making conceptualizing subject — an intrinsic nature supposedly not posited through such conceptualization” — is what is called self-existence, and this is the object of negation.
And the absence of this in relation to a person has been stated to be the selflessness of persons, while its absence upon phenomena such as eyes and so on has been stated to be the selflessness of phenomena.
From this we can implicitly understand that grasping at such an intrinsic nature on the basis of the person and on the basis of phenomena are the two forms of self-grasping.
This is as declared in Commentary on the Four Hundred Stanzas: Here what is referred to as “self” is that intrinsic nature — namely, the nature of things conceived of as not dependent upon others — and the absence of this is selflessness.
Because of the twofold distinction of persons and phenomena, this selflessness is understood in terms of two kinds — the selflessness of phenomena and the selflessness of persons.
Here too, in the following, Candrakīrti explains that the two forms of selflessness are distinguished not from the viewpoint of what is to be negated but from the viewpoint of their basis: The Buddha taught no-self in twofold terms, that of phenomena and that of persons.
With regard to the innate identity-view of grasping at self-existence, since the root text rejects the aggregates as its object of focus, and furthermore, in the Commentary, the self that is dependently designated is said to be its object of focus, we should take the mere “I” or the mere person that is the focal object giving rise to the thought “I am” to be the object of the identity view.
As for its aspect, the Commentary says: The thought “I am” imputes a self that does not exist, conceives such self to exist, and manifestly clings to it as real.
So, as stated here, the identity view grasps the “I” as truly existent.
Furthermore, the Commentary states: The identity view is an afflicted intelligence that operates by way of “I” and “mine.”
Therefore, as described here, for something to be the focal object of the innate identity-view, it must spontaneously give rise to the thought “I am.”
Thus, although the innate grasping at persons with separate continua as existing through their own intrinsic characteristics does constitute grasping at the self-existence of persons, it is not the innate identity-view.
The phrase "operating by way of 'I' and 'mine'" does not indicate that mere "I" and mere "mine" are the held objects of apprehension of this innate identity-view; what is indicated is that such an innate identity view possesses the aspect of apprehending these two, "I" and "mine," as existing through their intrinsic characteristics.
Furthermore, it is "mine" itself that is the focal object of the innate identity-view grasping at "mine;" we should not understand the eyes and so on to be its focal object.
As for its apprehending aspect, it grasps at "mine" as existing through intrinsic characteristics, on the basis of taking "mine" it as its focus.
If this is so, how is it that in the Commentary, in the part pertaining to the line "then, with the thought 'mine'" (.b), Candrakīrti writes, "Thinking 'this is mine,' they manifestly cling to all the things that are other than the object of grasping at 'I'" and thus states that clinging to "this is mine" on the basis of focusing on bases such as the eyes is a form of grasping at "mine"?
The meaning here is this. On the basis of having perceived the eyes and so on as "mine," we tend to manifestly cling to a "truly existing mine."
It is not the case, however, that eyes and so on — which are instances of "mine" — are themselves the objects of focus.
For this would bring the consequence that being an instance of identity view and a grasping at the self-existence of phenomena would not be mutually exclusive.
As for the focal object of the innate grasping at the self-existence of phenomena, this includes grasping at the aggregates of form and so on, at the eyes, ears, and so on of both self and others, as well as at the external environment that is not part of our inner world.
As for the aspect apprehended by this grasping at the self-existence of phenomena, it is the same as explained above in the context of grasping at self-existence of persons.
Now it is these forms of grasping at self-existence, of persons and phenomena, that constitute the ignorance binding us to the cycle of existence.
For example, Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness says: Things arisen from causes and conditions: that which conceives these to be real the Buddha taught to be ignorance; from this emerge the twelve links.
Thus taking the things and phenomena as one’s objects and grasping at them as existing with final reality is said to be the ignorance that is the root of cyclic existence.
And since such grasping at the self-existence of phenomena brings ignorance grasping at the self-existence of persons, it is taught that the twelve links of dependent origination come into being from such grasping.
For this ignorance to cease, one must see how nothing exists in the way such ignorance apprehends it and how the self-existence it conceives has no bearing on reality.
Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness states: But when one realizes things are empty, one sees the truth and is confused no more.
Ignorance comes to cease; from this the twelve links cease.
Praise to the Ultimate Expanse says: Grasping at “self” and “mine,” long does one conceptualize the “external.”
When one sees the two selflessnesses, the seed of cyclic existence ceases.
And: That which supremely purifies the mind is the teaching of no intrinsic existence.
Four Hundred Stanzas too says: When one sees no-self in the objects, the seed of cyclic existence will cease.
And: Therefore all afflictions will be destroyed as well through the destruction of delusion.
When this truth of dependent origination is seen, delusion will emerge no more.
Therefore, with all your efforts, engage this discourse alone.
Since the context in this passage is that of identifying delusion from among the three poisons, the delusion referred to here is afflicted ignorance.
And for that ignorance to cease, it is said that one needs to realize the profound truth of dependent origination, whereby the meaning of emptiness arises in terms of dependent origination.
The Commentary’s author too writes “Yogis engage in the negation of selfhood” and states how it is necessary to realize selflessness through eradicating the object of self-grasping.
Therefore, if one simply withdraws the mind from pursuing its object, without eradicating the object of self-grasping, this cannot be taken as engaging with no-self.
The reason is this: When the mind engages an object, it does so in one of three modes.
It is not invariably the case that because one does not apprehend something as lacking true existence one apprehends it as truly existent.
Likewise, just because one does not engage with either of the two forms of selfhood does not necessarily mean that one is engaging with either of the two forms of selflessness.
There are countless instances where the perspective of the mind remains in a third option.
When it comes to the two forms of self-grasping as well, we should identify them in our own mental continuum.
Looking there, we need to establish, on the basis of the very thing we are deluded about, how it does not exist in the manner we ourselves are apprehending it.
Otherwise, if our refutation and affirmation are directed only outwardly, then our pursuit becomes like a person searching for the footprints of a thief in the meadow while the robber has in fact fled into the woods. Such a pursuit will have no impact at all.
So when we have thus identified well what constitutes grasping at true existence, we come to recognize numerous instances of thought that do not constitute either of the two forms of grasping at self-existence.
This will, therefore, help prevent all the misconceptions pertaining to the view that reasoning inquiring into suchness negates all objects apprehended by conceptual thoughts, no matter what.
There are so many issues arising from questions such as this that require more discussion.
Some of these have already been addressed on numerous occasions elsewhere, and some will be addressed below as well. So I will not elaborate further here.
Refuting Arising from Self and Other How the meaning of the scriptures is established by reason
This has two parts: establishing the selflessness of phenomena through reasoning and establishing the selflessness of persons through reasoning.
Establishing the selflessness of phenomena through reasoning.
This has four parts: refuting arising from the four extremes on both levels of truth, rebutting objections against refuting intrinsic arising, how arising through dependent origination prevents distortions of adhering to extreme views, and the fruits of having engaged in analysis with reasoning.
This has three parts: stating the proposition that there is no arising through intrinsic nature, the logical proofs that establish this through reasoning, and the conclusion of having negated arising from the four extremes.
Stating the proposition that there is no arising through intrinsic nature.
Understanding that, out of the ten perfect equanimities, the other perfect equanimities can be easily indicated by presenting through reasoning the perfect equanimity of the absence of arising through intrinsic nature alone, the noble Nāgārjuna states the following at the beginning of his Treatise on the Middle Way: Not from itself, not from other, not from both, nor from no cause — nothing anywhere ever possesses arising at all.
"Ever" is synonymous with "on any occasion," while the word "anywhere," which is synonymous with "in any place," is a locative.
And these terms, which present the basis where there is no arising, indicate place, time, and philosophical standpoints.
The word "nothing" refers to things of inner and outer that do not arise in any of these three terms.
Thus the meaning of this stanza that begins "Not from itself" is as follows.
"It is never possible for anything of the outer and inner worlds to arise from itself at any place, at any time, and through any philosophical standpoint."
This is how one should apply the three terms and explain.
Similarly, one should extend this application of the three terms to the other three propositions as well: "It is never possible for anything to arise from other, from both self and other, and from no cause."
Although in the Tibetan version of Clear Words, this phrase is translated as "from itself nothing whatsoever" the translation here reads better.
The phrase "at any place, at any time" negates the possibility of interpreting along the lines akin to the situation where grapes do not grow in some areas and crops do not grow during some seasons.
Thus the inclusion of the word "never" is not meaningless.
Similarly, the phrase "through any philosophical standpoint" rejects the thought that although intrinsic arising may not exist from the standpoint of Madhyamaka, it could exist due to the philosophical standpoint of an essentialist school.
This is not to state, however, that things do not arise according to the essentialist schools.
The Commentary says: Here the term "not" should be associated with arising from itself and so on - the proof of existence - and not with existence per se.
For the negation of that existence itself is effected by way of implication.
What this states is that Nāgārjuna's stanza should not be read by dividing the stanzas into two parts, with the last two lines presenting the thesis and the first two lines presenting the argument.
Rather, it should be read as "There is no arising from itself ever or at any time" and extend this same predication to the other three theses as well.
The point is simply this: Were there arising through intrinsic nature, one would have to accept arising from any of the four possibilities as its evidence. Hence Candrakīrti refers to arising from four extremes as the "proof of existence."
Now when arising from the four extremes is negated, then by implication, arising through intrinsic nature is also negated, hence there is no fault of not being able to establish the absence of intrinsic arising by formulating the argument in this way.
This then is the meaning of the last word "implication" in the above Commentary passage.
I am not saying that it is incorrect to take the negation of arising from the four extremes as the logical reason to establish the absence of intrinsic arising, as it is done in Light of the Middle Way.
What I am saying is that dividing Nāgārjuna's stanza into separate parts, in the manner described above, is not what the text itself intends.
Things do not arise from other at any place, at any time, or because of any philosophical tenet” is how the three terms should be applied.
Similarly, the following appears in Clear Words: We accept conventional truth to be established by mere conditionedness, not on the basis of adhering to any of the four positions.
To do so entails the consequence of speaking of things as endowed with intrinsic nature.
So arising from other is not a convention of the scriptures; it is a convention of philosophical schools.
Furthermore, when arising from other is proposed, it is done so on the assumption that the other is something that exists by way of intrinsic characteristics.
Therefore, if one accepts such arising, one naturally subscribes to the notion that things are endowed with an intrinsic nature.
In this Candrakīrti tradition, however, arising from other does not exist even on the conventional level.
We accept cause and effect to be distinct entities on the conventional level, but this alone does not meet the criteria of what constitutes arising from other.
This is analogous to the following: as is stated in .a, given that each and every phenomenon bears dual natures on the conventional level, nature is something that does exist, but such a nature is not accepted in terms of intrinsic arising.
Clear Words states that the thesis that things are devoid of arising from themselves is a nonimplicative negation, and this is true also of the other three propositions.
Therefore, when establishing the absence of intrinsic existence, the thesis to be established must be a nonimplicative negation — that is, the simple elimination of what is being negated.
This is stated by Clear Words when it says: Since statements such as “Whatever sounds there are in the world, / they are all unreal” and “nothing exists” are found, the intention is to express the negation without implication.
So the meaning of “unreality” here is absence of intrinsic existence.
Also, the Commentary says: Having stated the four theses, now to establish these through reasoning, I will explain . . .
Later on, using the negation of arising from the four extremes as the reason, things are spoken of as being free of intrinsic arising.
Furthermore, at the end of negating arising from the four extremes, Clear Words states, “Thus this establishes that there is no arising.
It is not the case therefore that Candrakīrti does not wish to establish that things are devoid of intrinsic arising.
The statement in Clear Words that “The inferences have as their effect only the negation of what others propose” refers to the fact that propositions are there only to refute intrinsic existence adhered to by the other; the sense here is that, apart from this, they do not establish anything else.
The statement does not, however, reject the establishment of that simple negation.
Likewise, there is the following statement: As for us, we do not establish this to be either nonexistent or existent; rather, we refute what others impute to be existent and nonexistent.
This is because our wish is to clear away the two extremes and establish the path of the middle way.
The meaning of this statement too is that one merely eliminates the two extremes of existence and nonexistence as adhered to by the other, and apart from this, nothing else is to be established.
It is not the case, however, that the simple negation of the two extremes is not being established; for it states that the wish is to clear away the two extremes and establish the path of the middle way.
If things are not established as devoid of intrinsic existence, then since there is no third possibility, this would entail that things have intrinsic existence.
This is clearly stated in Averting the Objections: For if what is devoid of intrinsic nature negates the absence of intrinsic nature, then with the reversal of absence of intrinsic existence, things will have intrinsic existence.
As for the reasons why, although one accepts the thesis and proofs such as these, one does not become a Svātantrika Mādhyamika, I have explained these extensively elsewhere. So I will not elaborate further here.
How then are the two forms of negation defined?
In general, negation is cognized by the mind on the basis of explicit elimination of the relevant object of negation.
So the determination of something as not being that which is not itself is not in itself a negation.
On the other hand, we find terms like ultimate nature and ultimate truth, which do not explicitly negate any opposites on the linguistic level, yet when their referents appear to the mind, they do so in the aspect of eliminating conceptual elaborations.
Such terms are therefore terms of negation.
Negation is of two kinds. Of the two, nonimplicative negation does not imply or affirm any other fact following the explicit elimination of its object of negation.
For example, when asked, “Are brahmans allowed to drink alcohol?”
the response “They do not drink alcohol” is a simple rejection of the drinking of alcohol.
The statement does not affirm in any way that they do or do not drink other beverages.
Conversely, an implicative negation implies or affirms other facts following the mind’s elimination of its object of negation.
For example, when wishing to demonstrate that one of two individuals belongs to the commoner’s caste, if one utters the statement “He is not a brahman,” this does not merely negate the person being a brahman.
While a negative statement, it also affirms that the person belongs to a caste other than that of the brahmans — namely, a commoner’s caste.
There are three ways such other facts may be implied [by a negative statement] — through direct implication, indirect implication, and contextual implication.
First is like the statement “No-self exists,” whereby the elimination of the object of negation and affirmation of other facts are both effected with a single declaration.
The second is like the statement “Stout Dharmadatta does not eat during the day,” where another fact is implied indirectly.
These two, respectively, give specific examples of implying another fact directly or indirectly.
An example where [a fact] is implied both directly and indirectly is the statement “Dharmadatta, who does not eat during the day, is not skinny.”
The third type is like the statement “He is not a brahman” when stated in a context where it has not yet been determined whether the person is of the royal or brahman caste.
Here the statement [what caste he is] is not explicitly made.
A text cited in Explanation of the Commentary on the Lamp of Wisdom says: Negation that reveals by implication, that which affirms by means of one word, and that which does both but does not express the word itself — these are implicative [negation]; others are different.
Some assert that when a negation term is combined with a term that is affirmative, it is not a nonimplicative negation.
This is incorrect. Just because the term brahman is affirmative does not preclude the fact that the statement "Brahmans do not drink alcohol" represents a simple elimination of its object of negation.
This is analogous to the fact that just because sound itself is an evident fact does not preclude sound's impermanence being a concealed fact.
Some others say that when a negation is paired with the subject of the proposition, some other fact is implied. This too is incorrect. "
Brahman," for example, is the basis upon which one considers whether some other fact is being implied; it certainly cannot be the other fact that is being implied.
Thus, to present the noble Nāgārjuna's four propositions, Candrakīrti writes: Not originating from itself, and how from something other?
Not from both, and how from no cause?
Not originating from itself — namely, from its own essence — how can the effect originate from something other — causes that exist as other through intrinsic characteristics? It cannot.
It does not originate from both self and other, and how from no cause? It does not.
Now were there things that possess intrinsic existence, this would entail that they arise by way of one of the four possibilities.
Within the notion of intrinsic arising, there are only two possibilities: from a cause or from no cause.
And within the possibility of arising from a cause, there are only three possibilities — arising from itself, from other, or from the combination of both self and other. Therefore these four positions are exhaustive.
The logical proofs that establish this absence of intrinsic arising through reasoning
This has four parts: refuting self-arising, refuting arising from other, refuting arising from both self and other, and refuting arising from no cause.
Refuting self-arising
This has two parts: refuting self-arising through the Commentary author's reasoning and refuting self-arising through Fundamental Wisdom's reasoning.
Refuting self-arising through the Commentary author’s reasoning.
This has three parts: refuting the views of the philosophers who claimed to have realized suchness, demonstrating how there is no self-arising even on the conventional level from a perspective unaffected by philosophical views, and summarizing the essential points of these refutations.
Refuting the views of the philosophers who claimed to have realized suchness.
This has two parts: refuting arising from a cause that is identical in nature with its effects and refuting that cause and effect are identical in nature.
Refuting arising from a cause that is identical in nature with its effects.
The first has three parts: If an effect arises from a cause that is identical to it in nature, its arising will be pointless.
If an effect arises from a cause that is identical to it in nature, it’s contrary to reason.
Rejecting the defenses aimed at averting these flaws.
If an effect arises from a cause that is identical to it in nature, its arising will be pointless.
If things originate from themselves, nothing is gained.
[ Question:] On the basis of what reasons can one ascertain that things do not arise from themselves?
Response: If things, a sprout for example, which is the agent in the context of something coming to arise, originate from themselves, nothing additional is gained by coming into being in such a manner.
The reality of the sprout, which is its existence, has already been obtained before, at the time of its cause.
Here Sāṃkhyas maintain there is no denying that diverse causes and conditions bring forth a single common effect.
For this to be possible, they assert that a single primal substance must pervade them all, a shared single nature of these causes and conditions.
Therefore whatever is the nature of the cause, a barley seed for example, is the same nature as that of the conditions, the water, fertilizer, and so on.
Likewise, the nature of the sprout and the nature of its causes and conditions are also the same.
This they assert to be the nature of all manifestations of phenomenal reality.
Now since they do accept that the seed and the sprout are distinct, they do not say that the sprout arises from the sprout itself.
Nevertheless, when they assert that the sprout arises from its seed and from its own nature, given that according to them the two natures are identical, it must arise from its own nature and an unmanifest sprout must exist at the time of its cause. This is, in fact, how they uphold the notion of self-arising.
Although some elements of Sāṃkhya do not speak in terms of “arising” but assert that what was unmanifest becomes manifest from the cause, the meaning remains the same.
This is also the manner in which Sāṃkhyas accept the universal and its particulars to be identical in nature, which is utterly different from the Buddhist view that holds, say, functional thing and vase as sharing the same nature.
Now if the entire reality or nature of the sprout were to exist at the time of the seed, given that it is impossible for there to be a manifest sprout that is different from the sprout’s reality, then the sprout itself will have to be present at the time of its cause, not just the sprout’s nature or its reality.
In that case, having already come into being, it would be pointless for it to arise again.
If an effect arises from a cause that is identical to it in nature, it’s contrary to reason. Furthermore, something already born cannot repeat its birth.
Furthermore, something that is already born cannot repeat its birth again, arising in a redundant manner having already arisen.
The conjunctive “furthermore” indicates that this is a fault that ensues in addition to the point about how arising becomes pointless if something arises from its own nature.
Even if one upholds the thesis of manifest, we could refute by saying that if the manifest effect is already present at the time of the cause, this contradicts one’s own premise.
And if it is not present, we could refute the thesis by analyzing whether the manifest effect and its nature are identical or different.
Since the mere statement "Self-arising is contrary to reason" is only a proposition, the following is stated to present the reason that refutes self-arising:
If you conceive that what is once arisen can arise again, the growth of sprouts and so on will never happen in this world; and seeds will reproduce themselves until the end of time.
Now if you conceive -- that is, assert -- that what is once arisen, such as a seed, can arise again, repeating its birth, on what grounds will you assert that this repeated arising of the seed will end and the sprout will appear?
What condition is there to prevent the seed arising again?
There is none. In that case, the growth of sprouts and so on -- the stalk, the sprouting blades -- will never happen here in this world.
Another fault that ensues is that seeds will reproduce themselves perpetually, without interruption, until the end of time; for what has already arisen must arise again and again.
This objection reveals two flaws -- effects within a shared continuum will never arise, and causes within a shared continuum will arise perpetually with no interruption -- and states self-arising to be contrary to reason.
Rejecting the defenses aimed at averting these flaws For how can the sprout ever bring about the seed's cessation?
Suppose they maintain that the conditions beneficial for the arising of the sprout -- water, the spring season, and so on -- help transform the seed into something resembling a moist grain and, in this way, produce the sprout.
Furthermore, since it is contrary for the sprout to be present at the same time as the seed, the sprout causes the seed to cease and allow itself to come into being.
So we are not vulnerable to these two flaws of being contrary to reason.
And since the seed and the sprout are not of different nature or reality, it is also not the case that things do not arise from themselves.
This response too is untenable. Given that the two natures -- the nature of the seed and that of the sprout -- are identical in all possible respects, how can the sprout ever bring about the seed's cessation? This is not possible, just as the sprout cannot bring about the cessation of the sprout. So Candrakīrti understands.
Even if they foresee these sorts of possible objections, the reason they cannot avert them is this: They rebuff the objection with the thought that since the sprout’s destruction of the seed is on the manifest level, this is not similar to something destroying itself.
But to argue in this way is actually quite foolish.
For if all the realities and natures are identical to each other, distinct manifestations cannot be established.
So the objections cannot be avoided. Refuting that cause and effect are identical in nature
This has three parts: refuting using the consequence that the seed and the sprout will not have distinct shapes and so on, refuting the responses aimed at rebutting the objections, and refuting using the consequence that in both situations, its perceptibility or lack thereof would be the same.
Refuting using the consequence that the seed and the sprout will not have distinct shapes and so on
For you then, there cannot exist a sprout distinct from the seed that causes it, in shape, color, taste, potency, and ripened effects. There are other flaws as well.
For you then, there cannot exist a sprout distinct from the seed that causes it, in shape such as long and short, color like green, yellow, and so on, taste like sweet, sour, and so on, potency, and ripened effects.
This is because you make no distinction at all between the reality or the nature of the seed and that of the sprout.
Given all these undesired consequences, and furthermore, given that we do not perceive them as being not distinct, the realities of these two [a sprout and its seed] cannot be identical in all respects.
In this way Candrakīrti throws [to his Sāṃkhya opponent] the reverse of the consequence.
There is, however, a great difference between throwing the reverse of the consequence and throwing a reverse of a consequence that contains an autonomous syllogism.
"Potency" here refers to such properties as that of medicine against hemorrhoids, which clears away the ailment the moment it comes into contact with the body, and that of some medicinal essences that permeate the surroundings when hung in the air. “
Ripened effects” are the changes effected in results owing to variable conditions.
For example, when Indian gooseberry and long pepper trees and their like are nourished with milk, their fruits acquire a sweet taste.
Refuting the responses aimed at rebutting the objections If it is through shunning its prior reality that a thing turns into another thing, how then can the two be identical?
You might assert, “By abandoning the seed stage, it changes into a different state — namely, that of the sprout.
The seed and the sprout are merely different stages. The seed itself becomes the sprout.
Response: Now, if it is through shunning its prior stage, the stage of the reality of the seed, it turns into a stage that is another thing, the reality of the sprout, in that case, how then can it be correct to assert that the two are identical, such that the nature of that seed is also the very nature of the sprout?
For, according to you, the reality at that stage is the reality of that thing itself, and apart from that reality, there is no other thing that is separate.
Therefore the [thesis that] the reality of the seed and the sprout are not distinct at all in any respect is undermined.
If the thought occurs, “Although the shapes and so forth of the seed and sprout are distinct, they are not distinct with respect to their substance, so there is no contradiction [in the thesis of self-arising],” this too would be untenable.
For without apprehending the shapes and so on, one cannot apprehend the seed and sprout even in terms of their substance.
Thus you should not uphold this thesis [of identity of cause and effect].
There are other faults as well. With regard to the realities of the seed and sprout, if for you the seed is not different from the sprout before us, then just like the seed cannot be perceived at the time of the sprout, likewise what you call the sprout would also be invisible.
The term "or" indicates that alternately, being identical in all respects, just like the sprout, the seed too should be perceived by the senses at the time of the sprout.
Since this is not so, you who wish to avert these two faults should not uphold this thesis that there is no distinction between the realities of the seed and sprout.
If one understands these forms of reasoning well, all misconceptions — such as the view that while all phenomena are distinct realities with relation to each other, the ultimate natures of all are mutually inclusive of each other and are in fact one, the view that the ultimate nature of a thing's earlier state is itself the ultimate nature of its later state, and so on — will be avoided.
Demonstrating that there is no self-arising even on the conventional level from a perspective unaffected by philosophical views.
Having thus refuted the self-arising postulated by the Sāṃkhya system, which claims to contemplate the ultimate nature of reality — a system at odds with the Buddhist way — the following is now stated to show that, even from the perspective of worldly convention not trained in any philosophical tradition, it is incorrect to conceive of such self-arising:
Because the effect can be seen when the cause is no more, even ordinary people do not accept that the two are one.
Because the effect can be seen when the cause, the seed, is no more, even ordinary people do not accept that the two, the seed and the sprout, are one.
Summarizing the essential points of these refutations Thus the postulation that things originate from themselves is untenable in reality as well as in everyday experience.
Since self-arising is contrary to reason both on the ultimate level and on the level of worldly conventional truth, this postulation that outer and inner things originate from themselves is untenable in reality — ultimate truth — as well as in everyday experience of the world.
Because of this, when the noble Nāgārjuna refutes self-arising, he does not qualify it in terms of "ultimately" or "conventionally"; he refutes it in general, using the phrase "not from itself."
So when master Bhāviveka applies the proviso “ultimately” in his syllogism “that things do not arise from themselves ultimately because they are existents, like, for example, sentient beings,” we should understand that such a qualification is in fact pointless.
Refuting self-arising through Fundamental Wisdom’s reasoning.
There are other faults as well.
If you assert self-arising for effects, the produced (the effect) and that which produces (the cause) as well as the act being done and the agent that does the act will become identical.
Since they are not the same, we should reject self-arising.
For to assert it would entail many of the unwanted consequences explained at length in this text as well as in Fundamental Wisdom.
For example, with respect to the first fault, Fundamental Wisdom states: That the cause and effect are one, this can never be tenable, for if the cause and effect are one, the produced and the producer would be one.
So if the cause and the effect have identical natures, this is saying, then the father and the son or the eye and its consciousness will also become one.
With respect to the second fault, Fundamental Wisdom says: If the fuel were identical with the fire, agent and act would be one.
When refuted thus, the opponent might respond by saying, “If the consequence leveled is ‘Are the father and his son and the agent and the act identical in their natures,’ the answer is ‘Yes, I agree.’
But if the consequence leveled is ‘Are they identical in general?’ the answer then would be ‘No, there is no such entailment.’”
Nonetheless, because of the reasoning that forces the consequence that “if two things are identical in nature, as asserted in the manner characterized above, their manifestations would also be identical,” the opponent cannot avoid the above-stated faults.
Therefore, because of the pitfalls exposed thus far, those who wish to realize the two truths without distortion must not subscribe to the notion of self-arising, so we are advised.
Furthermore, existence and nonexistence of self-arising are direct opposites observing the law of the excluded middle. That is to say, when one is eliminated through negative determination, then if its opposite is not affirmed through positive determination, such an opposite has no existence. As such, one must accept the truth that there is no self-arising.
Refuting arising from other
This has two parts: stating the opponent’s standpoint and refuting that standpoint.
Stating the opponent’s standpoint
The Buddhist essentialist schools assert the following: “Since arising from self would be pointless, self-arising is untenable; and since that does not exist, arising from a combination of both self and other is also untenable.
As for arising from no cause, this is utterly deplorable and deserves to be rejected.
However, arising from other cannot be rejected, as done so in the line “How from something other?”
And furthermore, because the scriptures state that the four conditions, intrinsically distinct from their effects, are the causes that produce things, one has no choice but to accept arising from other.
As to what these four conditions are, some schools assert the following.
The term causal condition refers to five out of the six causes, excluding active cause, as stated in the line from the Treasury of Abhidharma that “What is called cause refers to the five causes. ”
The objective condition is as found in the line “Objective conditions include all phenomena” — that is, all phenomena that are objects of six consciousnesses.
The antecedent condition is as found in the lines “The minds and derived factors that have arisen, / their final instance, not of the same kind, is the immediately preceding,” meaning all the minds and mental factors that have arisen prior to entering the nirvana without residue.
The dominant condition is the active causes, as stated in the line “What is called active cause is the dominant conditions. ”
So the six causes are, as the Treasury of Abhidharma says: Active cause and the simultaneous, the homogeneous and the concomitant, the pervasive and the ripening cause — these are the six causes, they assert.
Some schools, based on the statement “That which creates something is its cause,” assert the following.
That which abides in the state of its producing seed is its causal condition.
And, just as in the example of an old man standing up, the objects that serve like walking canes for the mind and mental factors that are in the process of arising are their objective conditions.
The final moment of the cessation of the cause is the antecedent condition of the effect that is arising.
For example, the final moment of cessation of the seed is the condition immediately preceding the origination of the sprout.
The Commentary says, “For example, the final moment of cessation of the seed is the antecedent concomitant condition of the sprout.”
In Clear Words too, his refutation of intrinsically real antecedent conditions is done in relation to the antecedent concomitant condition of the sprout.
Buddhapālita upholds a similar position.
So theirs is a tradition in which an antecedent concomitant condition is accepted even for material things.
The dominant condition is that which, when present, the other (the effect) comes into being.
Clear Words states that such a condition includes what has arisen before, that which is arising concomitantly, and that which will arise subsequently. The Commentary too describes the latter two the same way.
This is identical in meaning to the statement in the Lamp of Wisdom that reads, “The conditions as postulated by the other schools, such as the immediate condition that is in front of us, the existing condition, and the no longer existing condition . . . ,”
where the translation of the terms seem in fact better.
As for the meaning of this passage [from Bhāviveka’s Lamp of Wisdom, Avalokitavrata’s] explanatory commentary says the following:
The immediate condition that is in front of us, as postulated by Sthavira, refers to the objective condition that has arisen directly before our senses.
The existing condition refers to the causal and dominant conditions, while the no longer existing condition refers to the antecedent condition, so they assert.
So were we to examine their characteristics, despite some slight variance in their names, all the conditions can be subsumed into the four conditions.
Since Īśvara and so on are not conditions, there is no fifth condition.
This must be definitely upheld, for it is as stated in the Treasury of Abhidharma: Four conditions generate the mind and mental factors, three produce both meditative attainments, and the others arise from both.
Not from Īśvara and so on, for things arise in sequence.
This is how they accept the notion of the four conditions.
Refuting that standpoint
This is twofold: refuting, in general, the standpoint that asserts arising from other and refuting, in particular, the Cittamātra standpoint.
Refuting, in general, the standpoint that asserts arising from other
This has five parts: the actual refutation of arising from other, rebutting objections to this refutation from the worldly perspective, the merits of refuting arising from other, how intrinsic arising does not exist in any manner, and the benefits of negating intrinsic arising on both levels of the two truths.
The actual refutation of arising from other The first has three parts: a general refutation of arising from other, a specific refutation of arising from other, and a refutation of arising from other by examining the four possibilities with respect to effects.
A general refutation of arising from other
The first has two parts: refuting by revealing absurd consequences and rejecting the response aimed at avoiding these faults.
Refuting by revealing absurd consequences
The first has two parts: the actual absurd consequences and a decisive analysis of these points.
The actual absurd consequences
This arising from other cannot be posited, for it is contrary to reason and scripture.
With respect to the latter, the thesis of arising from other contradicts many scriptural sources, such as the statement in the Rice Seedling Sutra, “And that sprout of name-and-form was not created by itself nor by something other.”
To explain that arising from other is contrary to reason, the following is stated: If something can originate from something other, then pitch darkness can originate from burning flames.
In fact, everything could arise from everything, for after all, being other equally pertains to all nonproducing things.
If, in dependence upon a cause that is intrinsically other, something — an intrinsically different effect — can originate, then pitch darkness can originate from burning flames, which are actually what is dispelled and that which dispels. In fact, everything, regardless of whether it is an effect, could arise from everything, whether it is its cause or not.
Why?
Because all nonproducing things, insofar as being something intrinsically “other” with respect to the effect, are exactly equal to those things that are accepted as the cause of that effect.
Thus these two extreme absurd consequences ensue from the opponent’s own accepted reasoning.
Let me explain these two consequences.
Just as, according to the opponent, a rice seed that produces the rice sprout is, by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, “other” than its effect, the rice sprout, in the same way, those things that do not produce rice sprouts — fire, charcoal, barley seeds, and so on — are also, by virtue of their intrinsic characters, “other” than the rice sprout.
This is the way in which those who propound other-arising assert their position.
Now, if these two cases of being “other” are admitted as equal, then just as from a rice seed — which is “other” — a rice sprout grows, then by extension, a rice sprout should arise from fire, charcoal, and so on as well.
Similarly, just as a rice sprout — which is “other” — grows from a rice seed, things like a vase, cloth, and so on too must also come from a rice seed.
Like this, parallels are drawn [between the two types of “other”].
This reasoning revealing such an extreme consequence is presented in the following in Fundamental Wisdom: That cause and effect are different is [a thesis that is] not tenable . . .
for if cause and effect are different, cause and non-cause will become equal.
In the case of both of these consequence-revealing arguments, Commentary states that they throw their reversals.
A decisive analysis of these points
This has two parts: () why extreme consequences ensue for arising from other and () demonstrating that it is not a contradiction to accept the reverse of the consequences.
Why extreme consequences ensue for arising from other.Here, some Tibetans assert that absurd consequences ensue for subscribing to the thesis of arising from other because cause and effect are, in temporal terms, necessarily sequential while otherness requires simultaneity. This is totally incorrect.
For in that case, all the faults one has leveled against the opponent to refute arising from other will equally apply to one’s own position.
Now if one responds to this by saying, “We have no position,” then one’s effort to seek the reason to refute arising from other in the first place becomes pointless.
Now, many Tibetans assert the following.
When logicians establish an entailment, for example, between fire and smoke on the basis of a specific instance of a smoke, or between being impermanent and being a product, they do so by establishing invariability across all places and all times.
This is done first on the basis of a specific instance, such as in relation to a kitchen in the case of fire and smoke or a vase in the case of being impermanent and being a product, and their aim then is to establish invariability between the two members of the entailment by drawing similarity across other times and places.
So what Candrakīrti is doing here, these Tibetans assert, is to throw an absurd consequence against them by using the argument that “insofar as being ‘other’ is concerned, all things are equal.”
They say that this type of argument topples the opponent’s position with a kind of domino effect.
This too is an expression of someone who has not understood the meaning of the text and has failed to comprehend how logical reasoning works.
Now when invariability is established between fire and smoke or being a product and being impermanent in general terms, without specifying a particular smoke or the product in a specific time and place, one can certainly remove the doubt that perhaps there are instances where although fire and being impermanent are negated, the two examples cited as reasoning proofs smoke and being a product are not negated.
In contrast, there are many instances where the two things can be negated as being cause and effect but may still exist as mere others.
So how can these cases be similar?
In fact, the very expression “toppling with a domino effect” reveals that theirs is an argument betraying ignorance of the way of reasoning. That this is so I have discussed extensively elsewhere.
In view of the above, how is this to be understood?
Here, Clear Words states: We accept the establishment of conventional truth in terms of mere conditionedness, not on the basis of adhering to any of the four positions.
Otherwise there is the consequence that things possess intrinsic nature, which is untenable.
If one accepts this mere conditionedness, cause and effect will then be mutually contingent and thus will not exist by virtue of an essence.
As a result, one will then not speak of things as being endowed with intrinsic nature.
In this manner, Candrakīrti explains the distinction between the kind of arising he does accept and the kind he does not.
Fundamentally, he states that if one accepts arising in terms of the four theses, one then has to speak of things being endowed with intrinsic natures.
Therefore, if one accepts arising from other, one subscribes to the notion of intrinsic arising necessarily; and in contrast, if one accepts arising by way of mere dependent origination, one need not accept intrinsic arising.
Therefore other in the context of “arising from other” does not refer to just “otherness”; it is an intrinsically established other.
As such, extreme absurd consequences are revealed to those who accept this thesis.
Such consequences are not leveled against accepting mere otherness.
This argument is similar in logical style to the one found later in the text, where it reads: Things different from each other through intrinsic characteristics could not logically be part of a single continuum.
There, against the assertion that although the earlier and later temporal stages of a thing are distinct, they share the same continuum, the objection is raised that if the two things are distinct by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, they cannot belong to the same continuum.
For if they are other from each other by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, any contingent relationship between the two would become untenable; yet if they are totally unrelated, then absurd consequences will ensue.
That is, when a particular effect arises from its cause, it should do so from all others, even those that are non-causes; and when a particular cause produces its effect, it should produce all others that are not its effects as well.
The reason some people do not understand this type of reasoning, as explained above, is because they fail to clearly differentiate what exactly is to be negated in delineating the object of negation, on the one hand, from what minimal standpoints are to be accepted in the presentation of dependent origination.
So when engaged in refuting the object of negation, recall what was said above concerning the criterion of what is to be negated.
Demonstrating that it is not a contradiction to accept the reverse of the consequences
One might wonder, “If one accepts the reverse propositions of those two consequential arguments presented above, how would one then interpret the following statements in Clear Words: The reverse propositions of consequential arguments are relevant only to the opponent, not for us, as we have no thesis.
And: When the proponent of no intrinsic existence presents a consequential argument to those who propound intrinsic existence, how can it follow that the proponent [himself] has to accept the reverse propositions of these consequences?
Also: Therefore the statement in a consequential argument merely refutes the opponent’s thesis; there is no [affirmation of] the reverse proposition of such consequences.
This is not a problem.
These statements are relevant only in the context of refuting self-arising, not with respect to all consequential arguments presented by the Mādhyamika.
These statements apply to the two reductio ad absurdum arguments refuting the thesis of self-arising.
The reductio consequences being drawn out in those two arguments are not simply that “arising will become pointless” and that “it will be endless”; the consequences being drawn out are that “re-arising will be pointless” and “there will be an infinite regress of arising.”
The reversal of these consequences — that “there is a point in such re-arising” and that “the process of such re-arising is finite” — are positions the Sāṃkhya opponent alone upholds.
And because we Mādhyamikas do not have such a thesis [of self-arising], we are not implicated by contradictions ensuing from adhering to such a tenet.
This then is the meaning of the first citation.
Buddhapālita too speaks of “there being no point in arising again,” mentioning the word “again” just as Clear Words uses the word “again.”
The present text too reads, “If you conceive that what is once arisen can arise again . . .”
So it is existence and re-arising that are incompatible, not existence and arising per se.
Similarly, it is existence and finitude of re-arising that are incompatible, not existence and finitude of arising; the latter two are not mutually exclusive.
The meaning of the second citation is this: When the Mādhyamika — the proponent of no intrinsic existence — presents the two reductio arguments against the Sāṃkhya, as outlined above, he himself has no wish to subscribe to the reverse propositions of those consequences.
It is also not the case that, despite having no intention to subscribe to them, he is somehow compelled to do so against his will.
Therefore the citation states that we Mādhyamikas do not subscribe to the reverse propositions of those two reductio arguments.
The meaning of the third citation is as follows. Although the reverse propositions of the two reductio arguments — that there is a point to arising again and that such arising is infinite — do not operate as logical proofs to establish the absence of self-arising, this does not mean they serve no purpose whatsoever.
Through demonstrating that arising would be pointless and that there will be an infinite regression to arising — something the Sāṃkhya does not accept — these reductio arguments serve merely to negate self-arising, which the Sāṃkhya does adhere to.
In contrast, in the case of the two reductio arguments [in the context of refuting arising from other], we Mādhyamikas do accept the reverse of the two consequential arguments.
We should therefore understand that there are two kinds of reverse propositions of consequentialist arguments: ones we accept and ones we do not.
Rejecting the response aimed at avoiding these faults.
This has two parts: the response aimed at avoiding these faults and rejecting that response.
The response aimed at avoiding these faults.
Hence rice sprouts cannot come from something like barley seeds.
Here the opponent states the following.
Cause and effect are other from one another by virtue of their intrinsic characters, but this does not mean that anything can arise from anything, for one can see that cause and effect, in their own ways, have a determinate correlation with one another.
This is so because that very thing that is capable of being produced by another thing is called or deemed, therefore, the effect of that other thing.
The presence of the word “therefore” is at variance with the Commentary.
And a specific cause that is capable of producing it the effect, though it is intrinsically other, is the cause and hence is determined to be the cause.
Therefore, so they assert, it is only by means of a special type of otherness that cause and effect are posited, not on the basis of mere otherness in general.
Furthermore, rice sprouts come from rice seeds sharing the same continuum; they cannot come from something like barley seeds, which do not share the same continuum, in the way that barley sprouts grow from barley seeds.
Even in cases where they share the same continuum, only from those that are its producer can the effect arise.
For example, subsequent instances do not produce preceding instances — it is only the preceding instances within the same continuum that produce subsequent instances.
Hence, the opponent might assert, not just anything can arise from anything.
To those who speak of the cause and effect as existing by virtue of their own essences, we ask the following: “What accounts for the determinate correlation between a rice seed and a rice sprout?”
If the opponent answers, “We can see such a determinate correlation,” we might then ask, “Why is it that you see such fixed correlation?”
When probed in this way, the opponent is reduced to simply stating, “Because such a determinate correlation can be observed, we see such a determinate correlation.”
In doing so, the opponent in fact presents no reason for the existence of such a determinate unique causal connection. Therefore he cannot avoid all the objections outlined above, not in the slightest.
Thus Candrakīrti argues.
The meaning of the is this: The opponent has failed to demonstrate any reason why there is no contradiction in asserting a determinate correlation between even though the two are distinct by virtue of intrinsic characteristics. So his rebuttal does not remove the fault.
Furthermore, to underline the fact that this otherness through intrinsic characteristics would equally apply to everything — whether or not they are related to each other as cause and effect — and that the opponent’s heralded claim would in fact undermine his own standpoint, the text says the following:
You do not think of barley, lotus pistils, kiṃśuka flowers, and so on as producing rice sprouts; indeed they have no power to do so. They do not belong to the same continuum; they share no likeness. Likewise, rice seeds, also being other, differ from their sprouts as well.
Just as, for example, you do not think of barley, pistils of lotus, kiṃśuka flowers, and so on, on account of just being “other,” as producing rice sprouts, you admit that indeed they have no power to do so, they do not belong to the same continuum, and they share no preceding instances of likeness as rice sprouts.
Likewise, rice seeds, also being other, would not possess those four characteristics with respect to the rice sprout, for they too differ from their sprouts by virtue of their own intrinsic characteristics as well.
This type of argument demonstrates how the notion of the presence or absence of these four characteristics cannot be postulated even in relation to things that are separate and unrelated.
A specific refutation of arising from other
This has two parts: refuting arising from other where cause and effect are regarded as sequential and refuting arising from other where cause and effect are regarded as simultaneous.
Refuting arising from other where cause and effect are regarded as sequential The first has two parts: the actual refutation and rejecting objections raised against the refutation.
The actual refutation
Up to now, for the sake of argument, we have engaged in refutation based on taking the otherness established by intrinsic characteristic as known to the opponent as if it were to exist.
Now the following is stated to demonstrate that intrinsic otherness is in fact impossible with respect to cause and effect:
A sprout does not exist at the same time as the seed, so without its correlate, how can seed be “other”? As it is not established that the sprout arises from the seed, you should discard the view that things arise from other.
For example, in the case of examples of already existing Maitreya and Upagupta, it is only on the basis of their contrast with each other that we perceive one to be different from the other.
In contrast, a sprout does not exist at the same time as the seed, for without the transformation of the seed’s form, there is no sprout at all.
There is, in the seed, no otherness from the sprout that exists by virtue of its own essence, and without its correlate, how can the seed be truly “other” from the sprout?
It cannot. Since there is no intrinsically real otherness, it is not established that the sprout arises through its own essence from the seed. So you, the opponent, should discard the view that things arise from other.
This demonstrates that, if the seed’s separateness from the sprout were to exist by virtue of its intrinsic nature, given that what possesses intrinsic existence can never cease to exist, then even at the time of the seed it would exist as a substance separate from the sprout.
And in that case, then the two would become temporally simultaneous.
Since this cannot be so, this demonstrates that these two things have no intrinsically existing otherness.
This argument does not reject the view that cause and effect are different entities on the conventional level.
It is critical to understand that this argument touches upon the object of negation.
Rejecting objections raised against the refutation. You may say that, like the up and down of two sides of a scale, which cannot but be seen to take place at the same time, the arising and ceasing of the produced and producer occur together.
Even if they are simultaneous, there is no simultaneity here of seed and sprout.
You may say that our statement that the sprout does not exist simultaneously to the seed is incorrect.
For example, like the up and down of two sides of a scale, which cannot but be seen to take place at the same time, the twin acts of arising and ceasing of, respectively, the producer — the seed — and the produced — the sprout — occur together in temporal terms.
Therefore the seed and sprout too can be said to be simultaneous.
It is inappropriate to employ the analogy of a scale to conceive the simultaneity of the ceasing of the seed and the arising of the sprout.
For even if the ascending and descending movements of the two sides of the scale are simultaneous, there is no simultaneity here between the seed and sprout, the referents of that analogy.
So the analogy does not hold.
The following is stated to show how this analogy does not hold:
For as you contend, that which is arising is about to arise, so does not yet exist, while that which is ceasing, though existent, is about to disintegrate.
If this is so, how can such a case be likened to a scale?
It makes no sense to speak of an arising when there is no producer.
For as you contend, that which is called arising, because it is about to arise and exists as a future sprout, does not yet exist in the present.
While that which is ceasing, though existent, is about to disintegrate, so it does exist in the present.
If this is so in that, at the moment when the sprout is about to arise, the seed is present but the sprout is future, how can such a case — the temporal status of the seed and sprout — be likened to the ascending and descending sides of a scale? They cannot be.
Because when the twin movements of the two sides of a scale are present, the ascending and descending of the scale also exist simultaneously.
In contrast, there is no simultaneity between the seed and the sprout.
These passages show that citing the example of the two sides of a scale — one ascending and the other descending — is inappropriate for demonstrating how the seed and sprout are simultaneous because their two acts ceasing and arising happen to occur simultaneously.
They do not demonstrate, however, that if two acts happen to occur at the same time, this necessarily means that the two things whose acts we are speaking of should themselves exist simultaneously in that very moment.
Now, if the opponent were to think, Although there is no simultaneity between something like a seed its sprout, there is simultaneity between the acts of these two, this too is untenable.
These opponents did not assert actions to be objectively distinct from the things themselves.
Furthermore, the context here is the refutation of the intrinsic existence of the twin acts.
There is another fault as well. The sprout which in relation to its act of arising is the agent is of the future in the moment of its arising, so the sprout does not yet exist at that time.
Without its existence, however, it makes no sense to speak of an arising, which is the dependent activity, when there is no sprout, the producer.
Therefore, since the sprout is not concurrent with the process of ceasing, the claim that the two processes are simultaneous is untenable.
Does not this passage in the noble Rice Seedling Sutra, The instant the seed ceases, the sprout arises, in the manner of the ascending and descending of sides of a scale, present this very analogy of a scale?
Therefore it is incorrect to refute the view that the seed and sprout resemble the ascending and descending sides of a scale.
It is true that this analogy is cited in that sutra.
However, this does not demonstrate arising from other; nor does it illustrate arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristic, states Candrakīrti.
Therefore the arising that is negated in the context of the line Such arising is . . . is the arising that exists by virtue of the thing’s own essence.
The simple arising of a sprout from its seed is not being negated at all.
One might ask, "If that sutra is not showing the simultaneity of the seed and sprout by way of the ascending and descending sides of a scale, then what kind of simultaneity is being illustrated by that analogy?
The Commentary states that this analogy is employed to thoroughly illustrate the illusion-like mutually dependent originations, which come about simultaneously and are established within an unanalyzed perspective.
The phrase "dependent originations, which come about simultaneously" needs to be related to the simultaneous presence of the two processes.
Furthermore, in that sutra the analogy of the ascending and descending sides of a scale is supposed to illustrate [two things] that are simultaneous, but this cannot be related to the simultaneity of seed and sprout.
Therefore, the rejection of the simultaneity of two acts here is that of two acts said to exist by virtue of their intrinsic nature; temporal coexistence of two acts in general is not being rejected.
For, as long as one accepts arising, the cessation of the cause and the approach of the effect to the point of arising would have to be taken to be simultaneous.
Thus there is nothing wrong with accepting arising per se and arising on the conventional level.
The contradiction only comes into play for ultimate arising or arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristics.
In the first case [on the conventional level], even if the processes of cause and effect, ceasing and arising, are simultaneous, the cause and its effect themselves need not coexist in time.
In the latter case [on the ultimate level], however, if the processes are simultaneous, the cause and effect themselves must necessarily coexist in time as well.
Here is the point. When it comes to the activity of an effect's arising, it is in relation to an agent, such as the sprout, that one can say such things as "This arises." So there is a mutual relationship of the "support" (agent) and the "supported" (its activity).
Now if the two, the support and the supported, were to possess ultimate existence, then it would be illogical for the two to change their natures into something else.
This would mean that the activity [of arising] would exist at all times as the supported, with the consequence that even when the sprout and the like are in the arising phase, the sprout must exist as the support for the arising process.
Since such a standpoint is vulnerable to objections, such as that cause and effect would be simultaneous, it is untenable.
In the conventional sense of arising, however, even if are once the support and the supported, they need not remain so at all times. So the situation differs between these two cases.
To summarize, the act of a sprout’s arising — which temporarily coexists with seed — is the process of the sprout approaching the moment of arising.
Such a process and the sprout are the supported and the support, yet at the time of this process, although the sprout does not exist, its process can exist, and there is no contradiction in maintaining this.
This is analogous to the following example. Generally speaking, if a thing that is in relation does not exist, the other relatum will also not exist.
Furthermore, the seed is the thing that is in relation, while the sprout is the other relatum.
Nevertheless, one can say, without contradiction, that at the time of sprout, the seed is no more but the sprout is present.
If one understands how to posit the flawless Madhyamaka standpoint on the basis of understanding well how to refute the opponent through these types of reasoning and how our arguments do not revert to our own side, one is then a true Mādhyamika.
If, in contrast, we encounter those who utter all sorts of fallacious arguments when engaged in refutation but, when these arguments are upended, seek haven in duplicitous bluster, we should relate to them as Candrakīrti says in his Clear Words, “I will not debate with those who blatantly deny what is obvious.
If you say it does not yet exist, we have already shown the faults of this.
The opponent here asserts the following.
Now arising from other may be untenable for seed and sprout, which have no intrinsic otherness owing to their lack of temporal simultaneity.
However, arising from other could exist when causes and effects are simultaneous, since they possess real otherness.
Take, for example, eye consciousness and its concurrent factors of feeling and so on.
Just as eye consciousness arises through the mere coming together of the eyes, form, and so on, as well as feelings and so on, in the same manner, the eyes and so on as well as the minds that are concomitant serve as conditions of feelings and so on. So some opponents might assert.
Response: Say that, if, for visual cognition, eye consciousness, what exists at the same time as itself — such as eyes and so forth, as well as other concomitant factors like discrimination and so on — are conceived to be its producing conditions.
In that case, even if one were to allow that such an eye consciousness were to be distinct from discrimination and so on, still, since something that already exists at the time of its cause will come into being again, what need is there for it [visual cognition] to arise?
None whatsoever. Wishing to avoid the fault of nonarising, you, the opponent, may say the effect does not yet exist at the time of the cause.
In that case, the faults of this — how there can be no intrinsic otherness to things that are sequential — we have already shown above.
In sum, this argument demonstrates how with respect to what are asserted to be cause and effect, even if otherness per se exists, intrinsic arising remains impossible.
In this way, the argument shows the impossibility of arising from other.
The previous argument demonstrated how, though arising is possible in relation to cause and effect, intrinsic otherness is not possible for them, and how because of this, arising from other is impossible.
Therefore the statement “there is arising from other” has long become empty of content, reduced to a mere sound proclaiming such a thing.
A refutation of arising from other by examining the four possibilities with respect to effects.
If the cause is a producer that produces something other, “Is what it produces existent, nonexistent, both, or neither?”
If existent, what need is there for a producer?
If nonexistent, what can a producer do? If both, again, what use is it? If neither, what use does a producer serve?
If the cause is a producer that produces something other, we will examine by asking, “Is what that cause produces intrinsically existent, nonexistent, both, or something neither existent nor nonexistent?” Now if, for now, the effect is intrinsically existent, what need is there then for it to have a condition as its producer?
For if something that has intrinsic existence can come to arise, then what has already arisen will arise again, and this we have already demonstrated to be untenable.
For a nonexistent effect, too, what can its producer, the conditions, do?
Like the horns of a rabbit, it is nonexistent!
As for the combination of both existent and nonexistent, again what use is a producer, the conditions?
Such a combination of the two is impossible.
Also, with regard to that which is neither existent nor nonexistent, what use does the producer, the conditions, serve?
For that which is neither of the two is impossible.
The Two Truths Rebutting objections to this refutation from the worldly perspective
This has two parts: () repelling objections from the worldly perspective assuming that arising from other is accepted in worldly convention and () repelling objections from the worldly perspective on the basis that arising from other does not exist even in worldly convention.
Repelling objections from the worldly perspective assuming that arising from other is accepted in worldly convention The first has two parts: () the opponent’s objection that such refutation is invalidated by worldly convention and () the response that worldly convention does not invalidate the refutation.
The opponent’s objection that such refutation is invalidated by worldly convention
“You may claim that the arguments we have put forth to prove arising from other have all been burned up by the fire of your intelligence like dry logs soaked in melted butter.
So go ahead and stir these logs with the blazing fire of your wisdom; it is pointless now to add more fuel.
Now you might ask, ‘Isn’t it the case that arising from other cannot be established without reasoning?’ To this we would say no.
There is nothing any reasoning can do about what is established by the world.
For what is perceived by the world possesses great power.
This point is rendered in the following: Worldly perspective, grounded in its own views, is authoritative;
that things come from what is other than themselves is perceived by people.
So what use is reasoning here in this context? Thus other-arising is established; what need have we of reasoning?
Given that the world’s population, grounded in its own views alone, asserts that the worldly perspective is authoritative, this perspective possesses great power.
And that things, effects that are other, do come from causes that are intrinsically other than themselves is perceived by people of the world.
Furthermore, when presenting logical proofs of the two kinds of facts — those that are evident and those that are not — reason is relevant only in the latter case.
Since the first is established by direct valid perception, proof through reasoning is unnecessary.
So here in this context of other-arising, what use is any other type of logical reasoning?
It is pointless.
Thus, as other-arising is established without recourse to any other proof, what need have we of reasoning?
None; it is established by direct perception.
So the opponent might assert.
The response that worldly convention does not invalidate this refutation
Those who do not understand without distortion the meaning of the scriptures, those who are bereft of the means — repeated study of the nature of no-intrinsic existence — that helps one part from the long-acquainted friend, the manifest clinging to the true existence of things stemming from the ripening of the habitual propensities for grasping at true existence imprinted within during the beginningless cycle of existence, such people might appeal to mere worldly convention, the arbitrary terms of the world.
Now this objection from arbitrary worldly conventions cannot be averted easily; it requires a lot of explanation about how the conventions of the world came to be.
For one, one needs to demonstrate how the perspective of the world can invalidate in the case of certain phenomena, identifying the specific characteristics of such a category of facts, and demonstrate how the worldly perspective cannot invalidate in the case of another category of facts.
To do this, one must first present the differentiation of the two truths.
This has five parts: general presentation of the two truths, relating this presentation to the actual context, the nature of each of the two truths, objections to the assertion that worldly perspectives invalidate the refutation, and the contexts and the manner in which worldly perspectives can invalidate.
General presentation of the two truths
This has four parts: how phenomena, differentiated in terms of the two truths, have dual natures, further presentation of the two truths, distinctions within conventional truth from the perspective of the world, how the apprehended object of that which is deluded with respect to its object of apprehension does not exist even on the conventional level.
How phenomena, differentiated in terms of the two truths, have dual natures
The first is as follows.
Response: All entities bear dual natures as obtained by correct or false views of them. What is seen by perfect vision is the ultimate truth, and what is seen by false vision is conventional truth, it is taught.
The buddhas, who realize without distortion the individual natures of the two truths, have shown that all entities — both inner, such as motivational factors like intention and so on, and outer, such as sprouts and so on — bear dual natures.
What are these two?
It is their nature in terms of conventional truth and their nature in terms of ultimate truth.
This indicates that, when differentiated, there are two natures even in the case of a single entity such as a sprout — a conventional one and an ultimate one.
It certainly does not indicate that one and the same entity — the single sprout, for example — is one truth or the other depending on whether the point of view is that of ordinary persons or āryas.
This understood, it is furthermore impossible for a phenomenon to have no nature at all.
So insofar as something is an established base, it must be either identical in nature or different in nature from other things.
Furthermore, it is not inconsistent to accept things to possess a nature yet reject that they possess intrinsic nature.
Here, the ultimate nature of entities such as sprouts is the nature of the thing obtained as the object of a specific gnosis by those who possess correct view and directly perceive the perfect truth.
Such a truth is not established, however, through its own essence.
This then is one of the two natures referred to above. “
Specific gnosis” indicates that it is not obtained by just any gnosis of an ārya person; rather it must be a specific or particular type of gnosis.
That is to say, it is obtained by the gnosis that realizes the way things really are.
Now, in presenting this as obtained or established by that gnosis, one might wonder whether something established by that must be truly existent.
To help avert this, Candrakīrti writes, “It is not established by virtue of its own essence, however.”
Given this statement, some assert that if the meditative equipoise of āryas were to realize the ultimate truth, it would become truly existent; hence ultimate truth is not an object of knowledge in the tradition of this master.
Such people have not understood at all the significance of this tradition’s statement that just because something is obtained by meditative equipoise does not mean it has true existence. By making such an assertion, they allow the tradition of the learned ones to be defiled.
The conventional nature, which is other than the ultimate, is that nature obtained by ordinary beings, whose eyes of cognition are utterly obscured by the cataracts of ignorance through the force of their false views.
This reality, perceived within the field of the vision of the childish as possessing existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristics, does not exist in the manner in which it is perceived. This, then, is one of the dual natures.
One needs to understand the statement that it is āryas who obtain ultimate truth in the sense of their being primary.
The statement does not imply that Candrakīrti holds that ordinary beings who have gained the Middle Way view cannot obtain it.
Similarly, the statement that it is the ordinary common person who obtains conventional reality should be understood in the sense that perceptions of outer and inner phenomena, which are the instances of conventional reality, occur primarily through the power of ignorance.
It is not the case that Candrakīrti says these phenomena cannot be obtained by the valid conventional cognitions of the āryas.
Although individual examples of conventional truth, such as vase and so on, can be obtained even by those who have not found the Middle Way view, to ascertain a particular phenomenon as a conventional truth by means of a valid cognition, one must first gain the Middle Way view.
Because if a given phenomenon had been established as a conventional truth, this would mean that it would be established as false; and to establish something explicitly as false, one first has to negate true existence with respect to that phenomenon by means of valid cognition.
Therefore, although as suggested by the phrase “through the force of false views,” ordinary common people perceive false realities, this does not imply that they establish these phenomena as false.
For example, when the spectators at a magic show see conjured horses and elephants, they do see false things, but they do not necessarily establish these perceptions to be false.
Therefore the fact obtained through seeing false reality, which defines something to be a conventional truth, refers to that which is obtained by valid conventional cognition perceiving false and deceptive objects of cognition.
Of these two natures or realities described above, what is seen by perfect vision — the object obtained by rational cognition realizing that perfect truth — is suchness, the ultimate truth.
This will be explained below in the section pertaining to the lines “Through the force of an eye disease, one perceives / such false things as floating hairs”.
That object of knowledge — namely, what is seen by false vision and obtained by conventional valid cognition — is taught by the Buddha to be conventional truth.
The two domains in relation to which the ultimate and conventional truths are defined have been described as distinct; there are not two different modes of obtaining one and the same thing.
Further presentation of the two truths
There seem to be a variety of views when it comes to the basis for differentiating the two truths.
Here, however, we take as that basis the object of knowledge. The Meeting of Father and Son Sutra says, as cited in Compendium of Training: Thus the Tathāgata comprehends the two truths, the conventional and the ultimate.
What is to be known by conventional and ultimate truth is also exhaustive.
Furthermore, because the Blessed One clearly saw them, clearly understood them, and excellently actualized them within emptiness, he is referred to as the Omniscient.
The expression “what is to be known” identifies objects of knowledge to be the basis for differentiating, while “is also exhaustive” indicates that the division into the two truths encompasses everything, and so because the Tathāgata comprehends both truths, he is described as the Omniscient.
Therefore the exposition of those who propound that the standpoint of Guide to the Bodhisattva Way is that ultimate truth is not an object of knowledge and that it is not realized by any cognition is a distorted one.
The division into two — conventional truth and ultimate truth — constitutes the actual differentiation.
On the question of what exactly the meaning of such a differentiation is, here too there seem to be many diverse opinions. I will explain this, however, as follows.
Both of these two truths possess natures, and it is impossible for two members to be neither identical nor different in nature.
Now if things happen to be different in nature from their emptiness of true existence, they will then come to possess true existence.
Therefore, just like being a product and being impermanent, the two are identical in nature but have distinct conceptual identities.
Commentary on the Awakening Mind says: Independent of the conventional, no ultimate truth can be found.
The conventional is taught to be emptiness; emptiness itself is the conventional; one does not occur without the other, just as being produced and impermanent.
The meaning of the first four lines is this: The suchness of the conventional is not of a different nature, because conventional truths are themselves empty of true existence, and furthermore, the emptiness of true existence is itself posited as the basis of the conventional.
The last two lines state that such being the case the two observe an invariable relationship whereby one does not come into being without the other.
And since theirs is a relationship of identical nature, the two are shown to be like “being produced” and “being impermanent,” which are also identical in nature.
As for the character of the individual members of this division, this is as mentioned above, when the individual truths were defined as what is obtained by the two types of valid cognitions.
Now if what is presented here is to be harmonized with Śāntideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva Way, how would one explain the following in that text?
The conventional and the ultimate — these are accepted to be the two truths.
The ultimate is not an object of intellect; the intellect is said to be conventional.
The first two lines here present the division into the two truths.
Then, when identifying the individual members of that division, ultimate truth is identified in one line, “The ultimate . . . ,”
while conventional truth is identified in another line, “The intellect is . . .
conventional.”
The assertion that what has been presented as the thesis in the preceding line — that the ultimate is not an object of intellect — is being established by the subsequent line does not appear to be the intent of the text at all.
In fact, the identification of the two truths found here in Guide to the Bodhisattva Way appears to be a restatement of the following passage from the Meeting of Father and Son Sutra, as quoted in Śāntideva’s own Compendium of Training: Of these two, the Tathāgata sees the conventional to be the purview of the world.
That which is the ultimate is ineffable: it is not an object of knowledge, it is not an object of detailed knowledge, it is not an object of thorough knowledge, it is not shown. . . .
The meaning of the statement that the ultimate truth is not knowable is that it is not an object of cognition in the manner that I will explain below when interpreting a passage from Entering the Two Truths Sutra.
Otherwise, if the ultimate truth is not an object of any cognition at all, this will contradict the statement [found in that same Meeting of Father and Son Sutra] that because the Buddha has directly actualized both conventional truth and ultimate truth — namely, emptiness — he is defined as the Omniscient.
I will touch upon this point about the Buddha's cognition of the two truths more extensively in a section below as well.
As for the identification of conventional truth in Guide to the Bodhisattva Way, it is not that intellect alone should be taken as such; the intended referent is the object of the intellect.
Just as the sutra states this to be "the purview of the world," here too it refers to facts obtained from within the sphere of experience or from the purview of the worldly or conventional consciousness, which perceives false realities.
This is how one should understand the sense in which the object of the intellect constitutes the conventional truth.
The division of objects of knowledge into two truths underlines the point that all objects of knowledge are exhausted within this twofold division.
For a scriptural citation on this point, there is the passage from the Meeting of Father and Son Sutra quoted above, and this is also stated explicitly in the Meditation on the Definite Revelation of Suchness: There is the conventional and likewise the ultimate; there is never such a thing as a third truth.
The Commentary too says: Likewise, whatever other truths there may be, all of these should also be ascertained as encompassed by either of the two truths.
In this way, the Commentary explains how the numerous enumerations bearing the word "truth" found in the Ten Grounds Sutra are encompassed within the two truths.
There, the truth to be understood by means of differentiation is identified as referring to the presentations of the aggregates, elements, and sources, so this master Candrakīrti too accepts the division of truth into two as exhaustive.
Here is the reasoning: When something is determined to be false and deceptive, then its being nondeceptive and true must necessarily be negated.
This is because being deceptive and being nondeceptive are direct opposites, mutually excluding each other.
Given this, the two truths must pervade the entire class of knowables, and as such they exclude any third possibility that is both or neither.
This is as stated, for example, in Light of the Middle Way, where it says: Those that have the characters of mutually excluding each other are such that, when one is eliminated through negative determination, if its opposite is not affirmed through positive determination, then its opposite has no existence.
To conceive of something that is neither of the two is illogical.
Also: Those two things — of which one does not exist if it is not established through positive determination when its opposite is eliminated through negative determination — mutually exclude each other.
Those characterized by such mutual exclusion are pervasive with respect to everything.
And that which pervades everything eliminates any other possibilities.
Take, for example, the case of an embodied being and a non-embodied being.
This point should be understood in the context of all other examples of direct opposites.
Now if an example of direct opposites that excludes the possibility of a third term cannot be shown, there will then be no facility to engage in refutations based on critical analysis where the possibilities are confined to binary terms, enquiring “whether something does or does not exist,” “whether it is one or many,” and so on.
But if there do exist such examples of direct opposites, then when one of the two terms within that direct opposition is negated, if the other is not established, then the other term has no existence.
Therefore, to say that there are no direct opposites according to Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka suggests a failure to become versed in the ways of refutation and affirmation.
Insofar as when one term in a direct opposition is eliminated the other comes to be established, and when one is negated the other is affirmed, there is no difference between Prāsaṅgika and Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
Distinctions within conventional truth from the perspective of the world
Of the two, objects and subjects within conventional truth, to state that the class of subjects includes, from the perspectives of worldly cognition, both those that are veridical and those that are distorted, the text says: False vision is also said to be of two kinds: that of clear senses and that of impaired senses.
Cognitions deriving from impaired senses are
held to be distorted compared with those of the unimpaired.
Not only is the class of knowables differentiated into two truths, false vision in the case of subjective mind is also said to be of two kinds — those that are veridical and those that are distorted.
They are that of clear senses, untainted by temporary conditions of illusion and cognitions based upon them, and that of impaired senses, subjects tainted by temporary conditions of illusion.
Of these, cognitions deriving from tainted senses are held to be distorted compared with those of the unimpaired, cognitions untainted by temporary conditions of illusion.
The former are accepted to apprehend the objects without distortion.
This distinction between the two is drawn not from the Madhyamaka's own standpoint but from the perspective of the everyday world.
Just as the class of subjective cognition is differentiated in terms of distorted and undistorted, this is true for the class of objects as well.
That this is so is stated in the following: Everything the six unimpaired senses grasp and perceive within everyday experience of the world is true from the perspective of the world; the rest the world itself defines as false.
Everything the six unimpaired senses grasp, senses unimpaired by temporary conditions of illusion, and perceive within everyday experience of the world — this is true or veridical within the framework of or from the perspective of the world.
These objects are not posited as being true or veridical from the perspective of the āryas.
Here the two phrases "from the perspective of the āryas" and "from the Madhyamaka standpoint" share the same meaning.
The rest, such as mirror images and so on, which are perceived as objects when the senses are impaired, the world itself defines as false.
The term "itself" here suggests that, to establish these cognitions as deluded, valid conventional cognition alone is adequate.
There is no need to seek recourse in rational cognition.
The conditions that impair the senses from within refer to cataracts, having yellowish vision, eating datura fruit, and so on.
Datura is a resin plant, and when its fruit is consumed, everything appears golden.
The phrase "and so on" includes disease epidemics among other things.
The conditions that impair the senses from without are mirrors, cave acoustics, bright colored sand when struck by the spring sun, and so on.
In these cases, even though the conditions distorting the senses do not reside within the person, they still become the cause for apprehending mirror images, echoes, and mirages grasped as water.
One should also understand this class of external conditions to include the spells and relevant substances prepared by magicians.
The conditions that impair mental cognition include, in addition to such spells and relevant substances, distorted philosophical views, false arguments, impairment by sleep, and so on.
Since sleep is described here as a factor that impairs our mental faculty from among the six senses, those who claim that master Candrakīrti accepts sensory perceptions to be present in sleep represent a great distortion.
This being so, the causes of impairment in the particular context here should not be held to be the impairment caused by the contamination of ignorance, such as of the two forms of grasping at self-existence ingrained in us since beginningless time.
Here, as explained above, the causes of impairment are the conditions of illusion that impair our senses temporarily.
And the distinction drawn here — how conventional facts apprehended by the unimpaired six consciousnesses are veridical and how those that are contrary are distorted — remains solely within the context of the world’s perspective.
The analysis is on the basis of whether something perceived to exist within such a perspective is invalidated by everyday cognitions of the world.
From the perspective of the āryas, however, no such distinction between veridical and distorted conventional truths can be made.
Just as reflections and the like do not exist in reality as they appear, blue and so on perceived by those who possess ignorance do not exist by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics as they are perceived to.
Thus no distinction can be made between these two types of cognitions with respect to whether or not they are mistaken.
Now, with respect to such instances — the perception of false objects due to one’s sense organs being impaired by immediate conditions, perception of people and so on in a dream due to impairment of mental consciousness by conditions such as sleep, perception of magical horses and elephants and mirages grasped as water and so on that occur in waking states — it may well be true that even ordinary worldly cognition can realize that such perceptions are distorted.
However, what is apprehended falsely by the mind impaired by inferior philosophical tenets cannot be cognized as distorted by ordinary worldly cognition.
How then are such things posited as distorted solely from the perspective of the world?
The impairment here in the context of examining whether a perception is impaired is not the impairment from grasping at things distortedly due to our innate ignorance.
In any case, the postulations of inferior philosophical tenets refer to notions such as primal substance and so on, which are conceived falsely because one’s mind has been conditioned by philosophical views.
True, ordinary worldly cognitions would not realize that such notions are distorted.
Nonetheless, if the valid conventional cognitions of those whose minds may have not been directly informed by an understanding of suchness realize they are distorted, this constitutes their being realized as false by worldly cognition.
As for other categories, such as the referents conceived by the two types of grasping at self-existence, these belong to the class of what are referred to as “objects apprehended by unimpaired senses.”
Such things are thus veridical or true from the perspective of ordinary worldly understanding; nonetheless, they have no existence even on the conventional level.
One might ask: “You may not distinguish veridical from false conventional truths because you do not accept the possibility of a veridical conventional as such.
But why would you not posit the subject, cognitions tainted by ignorance, and its objects as distorted conventional truths?”
This is because the positing of conventional truth by valid conventional cognition, if one posits distorted conventional truth, must be done from the perspective of such cognition.
However, valid conventional cognition cannot establish the distortion induced by the habitual propensity toward ignorance to be an error.
How the apprehended object of that which is deluded with respect to its conceived object does not exist even on the conventional level.
Now to relate what has already been explained in general — how an impaired mind distorts its conceived object, — to a specific context by way of an analogy,
the text says: Overcome as they are by ignorance’s sleep, tīrthikas postulate a “self.” As with things imagined as real owing to illusion, mirage, and the like, this has no existence even according to the world.
Tīrthikas are overcome by ignorance’s sleep.
Their minds suffer from impairment by inferior philosophical tenets and false logic, and because they wish to engage with suchness, they do not uphold accurate notions of arising or disintegration that even the philosophically untrained like the cowherders, unlearned women, and so on acknowledge.
Instead, out of their desire to surpass ordinary people of the worldly perspective, they are like someone climbing a tree who lets go of the lower branch before grabbing on to the next; they will suffer a great fall into an abyss of inferior philosophical views.
Because they are divorced from the perfect vision of the two truths, they will not obtain the resultant liberation.
Therefore the “self” postulated by these upholders of extreme views as found in their individual treatises, characterized by three attributes eternal, unitary, and indivisible, does not exist even on the level of worldly conventional truth.
This statement clearly refutes the assertion that, in this tradition of Candrakīrti, existence on the conventional level is defined purely in terms of an existence from the perspective of a deluded cognition.
Similarly, as with all things imagined as real owing to illusion, mirage, mirror images, and the like — as real horses, real elephants, and real faces, for example — this has no existence even according to the world: namely, conventional truth.
Therefore, for something to exist on the conventional level, it must be established by valid cognition.
Now although such conceived objects of deluded perceptions do not exist even on the conventional level, Candrakīrti does not hold the situation to be the same when it comes to their appearing objects.
The perception of the five sense objects of forms, sounds, and so on as existing by virtue of their own characteristics, which we experience right now with our sensory cognitions, is due to the contamination of ignorance.
Therefore, insofar as their being deluded with respect to their appearing objects is concerned, the only difference between our everyday perceptions tainted by ignorance, on the one hand, and the delusory perceptions of mirror images, echoes, and so forth on the other is the degree of subtlety.
Furthermore, although the intrinsic existence of blue and so on as well as reflections being the real face remain impossible, just as the reflection itself exists, likewise, blue and so on exist, despite their lack of intrinsic existence.
Moreover, Candrakīrti accepts reflections to be visible forms just like other external objects.
Later in the text, in fact, he speaks of how mirror images produce sensory perceptions.
This mode of understanding should be extended also to the example of magical illusions, in which the eyes perceive horses and elephants, as well as to echoes and so on.
And this presentation is unique to the excellent system of Candrakīrti.
Given that the truth of suchness is not established by conventional cognition, arising from other cannot be refuted if one remains only within the ordinary worldly perspective.
It is negated on the ultimate level by accepting the vision of the āryas.
Hence the refutation of arising from other takes place with the proviso “ultimately.”
In view of this, just as what is perceived by an eye afflicted by disease, such as the vision of floating hairs and so on, cannot invalidate the perception of those free of such defect and thus do not experience such false vision, likewise the mind of ordinary persons tainted by ignorance and deprived of or divorced from the stainless or uncontaminated wisdom cannot invalidate a pure mind that is untainted, not polluted by ignorance.
Hence, this negation of arising from other on the ultimate level cannot be invalidated, even if one were to allow other-arising to exist, for the sake of argument, from the perspective of worldly cognition.
Therefore the opponent is justifiably a source of amusement for the learned sublime ones.
The nature of each of the two truths
This has two parts: conventional truth and ultimate truth.
Conventional truth The first has three parts: the perspective from which the conventional is true or untrue, how the mere conventional appears or does not appear to the three individuals, and how the ultimate and conventional become as such from the perspectives of ordinary beings and āryas.
The perspective from which the conventional is true or untrue
The first has two parts: the actual point and a unique presentation of the afflictions.
The actual point Because delusion obscures the true nature, it is a concealer; that which is contrived by it and appears to be real the Buddha spoke of as true for a concealer; and fabricated entities are merely conventional.
Because it obscures sentient beings from viewing the true nature — the way things really are — it is called delusion.
This ignorance that reifies the reality of things, attributing intrinsic existence to them when there is no such intrinsic existence, and that has the characteristic of obscuring vision of the true mode of being is a concealer.
This line identifies what is the concealer in relation to the word truth in the context of the term conventional truth, where one is speaking of the concealer from the perspective of which things are conceived to be true.
This line does not define what conventional is in general.
This identification parallels the following stanza from the Descent into Laṅkā Sutra, where cognition that mistakes what is essentially devoid of ultimate intrinsic existence as possessing such existence is stated to be the “concealer”:
The arising of things is on the conventional; on the ultimate there is no intrinsic nature.
That which is mistaken toward no intrinsic nature is held to be a concealer of the perfect truth.
The Sanskrit term for “conventional,” saṃvṛti, can also connote something that conceals, so saṃvṛti is referred to here as a “concealer.”
What does it conceal?
As the phrase “concealer of the perfect truth” suggests, it conceals the meaning of the perfect truth; so it is asserted to be “conventional” or a “concealer.”
This phrase “concealer of the perfect truth” is not referring to veridical conventional truth within the distinction of veridical and distorted conventional truths.
Thus the saṃvṛti in the first line and the saṃvṛti in the last two lines should not be understood to have the same meaning.
The first refers to “conventional” in the sense of a framework within which one accepts that things possess arising and so on.
The latter usage of saṃvṛti is in the sense of a “concealer” that grasps at true existence, which is the perspective that holds all things to be true.
Through the force of that “concealer” grasping at true existence, phenomena such as blue and so on, which are in fact contrived and fabricated, appear to sentient beings as possessing intrinsic existence despite being devoid of such status.
These phenomena that are contrived by it and appear to be real — since they are true from the perspective of distorted conventions of the world — the Buddha spoke of as true for a concealer.
How it was taught is as found thus in the sutra cited above.
Those entities fabricated by conceptualization, which remain untrue from the perspectives of any of the three individuals because they remain untrue from their perspectives, are referred to as “merely conventional.”
The following passage, which I will explain, appears here in the Commentary:
A few examples of dependent origination, such as reflections in a mirror, echoes, and so on, do appear as false to those ridden with ignorance; yet some examples, such as the blue color of material forms, the mind, feelings, and so on, appear to them as real.
The true nature that is the mode of being of all phenomena never appears to those ridden with ignorance.
Therefore such intrinsic nature and those things that are false even on the conventional level are not conventional truths.
The phrase “a few examples” is translated as “some” in Naktso’s version, which reads better.
"Reflections in a mirror, echoes, and so on do appear as false" refers to these perceptions being erroneous.
This is a falsehood in the sense of something appearing as a face but at the same time being devoid of being such.
So emptiness of true existence in that context refers to its lack of being the real face it appears to be; it does not mean the reflection’s emptiness of true existence in the sense of its lack of existing by way of intrinsic characteristics.
Therefore, even when the reflection is established as the absence of being the real face, there is no contradiction at all in deeming it to be real from the perspective of the “concealer,” the mind that grasps it to exist through its intrinsic characteristic. So a mirror reflection is indeed a conventional reality.
The statement here that mirror reflections are not conventional truths should be understood as follows.
From the perspective of the worldly conventions of those versed in language, something like a mirror image is false in that it is not a real face, and in that sense it is not a conventional truth.
It cannot be the case that a mirror image is not accepted to be a conventional truth as defined in the line “and what is seen by false vision is conventional truth, it is taught”.
If, in contrast, it were contradictory for something to be a conventional truth because it lacks true existence on the conventional level, this would violate many presentations: such as the statement that there is no existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristics even on the conventional level, or that negating true existence and establishing the absence of true existence are all undertaken on the conventional level, and so on.
Therefore the assertion that such things as mirror images, recognized as erroneous even by ordinary everyday cognition, are not conventional truths but are “mere conventionalities” reflects an apparent failure to properly understand the following points: the exhaustive nature of the twofold division of truth, and the distinction between the differentiation of truth and falsity from the perspective of the world and the Madhyamaka’s differentiation of truth and falsity.
The statement “The true nature that is the mode of being of all phenomena never appears to those ridden with ignorance” also needs to be understood in terms of cognitions tainted by ignorance.
For it is maintained that āryas who have not yet fully abandoned ignorance do realize suchness through direct perception.
Now, although post-equipoise states of the gnosis of āryas on the learner’s stages and the views of ordinary beings realizing suchness, since they are tainted by ignorance and its habitual propensities, do not perceive ultimate truth directly, it is not the case that they do not perceive it at all.
Understood thus, Candrakīrti’s statement “Therefore conventional truth is defined on the basis of afflicted ignorance, which is one of the factors connected with cyclic existence” indicates that the ignorance that grasps at phenomena as truly existent — known as grasping at the self-existence of persons and of phenomena — is understood to be the link of ignorance within the twelve links of dependent origination.
It is thus not held to be an obscuration to knowledge.
The statement that conventional truth is defined on the basis of such ignorance grasping at true existence indicates how such conventional facts are characterized as true from the point of view of a specific perspective.
It does not suggest that conventional realities like vases, bolts of cloth, and so on are established by this ignorance grasping at true existence.
Because what is posited by such grasping at true existence is something that Candrakīrti does not accept even on the conventional level.
Since the “conventional” in “conventional truth” — which refers to the perspective from which things are posited as being true — and the “conventional” in the conception of a vase and so on as “conventionally existent” are the same term, it appears there have been many who conflated these two senses of the term.
It is therefore critical that we differentiate these different senses correctly.
Question: Are these phenomena like vases and so on true from the perspective of the conventions of all beings who are not fully enlightened, or are there some individuals from the perspective of whose conventions these are not true?
Reply: Phenomena like forms, sounds, and so on, which are defined as conventional truths, says Candrakīrti:
These, in fact, possess the nature of being contrived for śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas who have abandoned the affliction of ignorance and perceive the conditioned world to be like mirror images.
These phenomena are not true for them because these beings have no pretensions of them being true.
As to the meaning of this statement, there are three kinds of persons for whom such phenomena are not true — śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas.
Here too, it is not just any śrāvaka or any pratyekabuddha or bodhisattva; it is those with specific characteristics.
One such feature is the direct realization that all conditioned things are just like reflections in that although devoid of intrinsic existence, they appear as such.
To exclude bodhisattvas below the seventh ground and śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas on the learner’s stage, who also have this realization, the three individuals are also described as having “eliminated the affliction of ignorance.”
Thus we must understand these persons to include bodhisattvas on the purified grounds and śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha arhats. It is from the perspectives of these three that phenomena remain untrue.
That which is untrue includes, as the phrase “these, in fact” suggests, outer and inner phenomena.
The reason they are untrue for these beings is because these beings have no inclination for apprehending true existence given that ignorance grasping at true existence has ceased for them.
Therefore these passages from the Commentary establish how the outer and inner phenomena remain untrue from the perspective of the convention (saṃvṛti) of these three kinds of persons.
So since the Commentary in no way establishes these phenomena to be not conventional truths for these beings other than demonstrating them to be untrue for them, those who read these passages as demonstrating these phenomena are not conventional truths for the three persons expose a great crudeness in their intellectual engagement.
This is therefore an inferior standpoint whereby the intention of the master Candrakīrti is soiled by the stains of their own intellect.
It is not that these phenomena are being demonstrated as untrue to the three kinds of persons for their benefit; it is for people like ourselves that these phenomena are demonstrated to be untrue from the perspectives of those three kinds of person.
As for beings who are other than the three classes and below them, they all possess innate grasping at true existence, and so nothing can be demonstrated to be devoid of true existence from the perspectives of any of their conventions.
Now if the meaning is not as explained above, and that it is the case that these phenomena are being shown to not be conventional truths for these individuals, then the rationale presented would become totally irrelevant.
For to establish via an instance of cognition that a particular thing is a conventional truth, that thing needs to be established as false, and so to cite the absence of clinging to true existence as the reason in that case would be laughable.
The reason why a fact needs to be established as false to be established as a conventional truth by an instance of cognition is this: When the meaning of truth is understood in the context of the conventional truth of, for example, vases and so on, we need to bear in mind two senses of the term truth — one from the perspective of the subject for the cognition and the other in the objective sense.
When one sees that their truth is not posited in the objective sense but posited as true merely from the perspective of grasping at true existence, a concealer, one comes to recognize that without such qualification, such phenomena do not possess true existence and are instead seen to be false.
This is the critical point to understand.A unique presentation of the afflictions
I feel it is crucial to recognize that this tradition has an identification of the afflictions that is distinct from the Upper and Lower Abhidharma systems.
In general, grasping at the true existence of things is twofold — grasping at the true existence of persons and grasping at the true existence of phenomena.
It was already mentioned above that Candrakīrti also considers these two to be the two types of grasping at self-existence.
Candrakīrti describes such grasping at true existence as afflicted ignorance both in his commentary on Entering the Middle Way and in his commentary on Four Hundred Stanzas.
He states furthermore that such ignorance has been eliminated by śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha arhats, and in his Commentary on the Four Hundred Stanzas, he states that bodhisattvas that have obtained forbearance toward the unborn nature have also eliminated such ignorance.
Therefore this afflicted ignorance is the force opposing the knowledge of suchness — namely, no-self.
The opposite of such knowledge, in turn, should not be understood as a mere absence of knowledge or some such.
It should be understood as a direct opposite, for it reifies the person and phenomena as intrinsically existent.
Understood thus, the reification of self-existence of phenomena is considered afflicted ignorance, and the twin grasping at the intrinsic existence of “I” and “mine” constitute the identity view. So in this respect, this Candrakīrti tradition diverges from that of the Abhidharma.
The Abhidharma tradition, as found in the ninth chapter of Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Abhidharma autocommentary, on the other hand, identifies grasping at persons as self-sufficient, substantial realities as the identity view that grasps at “I,” and the identity view that grasps at “mine” it identifies to be viewing things conceived as “mine” belonging to such a person.
So the way identity view is defined is very different.
Now although the grasping at persons as self-sufficient, substantial realities is found in those whose minds are not tempered by philosophical thinking, grasping at persons as entities separate from the aggregates with distinct characteristics does not exist in those whose minds are not conditioned by philosophy.
So even with respect to views grasping at extremes, there are two types.
"If this is so," one might ask, “how would you prove to those who maintain persons and phenomena to exist through their intrinsic characteristics that grasping as such constitutes afflicted ignorance and represents the twofold grasping at self-existence?”
Now insofar as intrinsic existence of persons and phenomena is concerned, this will be negated by those reasonings that refute it; and when this happens, apprehending things in such terms as true existence will come to be established as erroneous with respect to its apprehended object.
When this is established, then grasping at the true existence of persons and phenomena will come to be confirmed as constituting the twofold grasping at self-existence.
Once these facts are confirmed, then grasping at true existence will come to be affirmed as the force directly opposing the knowledge of suchness, and as such, it will be understood to be a form of ignorance.
Since it can be shown that as long as such ignorance does not cease, identity view too will not come to an end, this leads to the conclusion that such ignorance is indeed an afflicted ignorance.
Thus it is critical to understand how to define unique presentation of the afflictions.
The way other afflictions such as attachment operate on the basis of the delusion grasping at true existence is explained in Four Hundred Stanzas and its commentary as follows: Just like body faculty in the entire body, delusion resides in all afflictions.
Candrakīrti’s commentary on these lines says: “Delusion” refers to ignorance, for it apprehends things as real; as such, it operates by way of exaggeration superimposing truly existent natures upon things.
Attachment and so on also operate by thoroughly attributing qualities of attractiveness or unattractiveness upon the nature of things imputed by delusion, and as such, they do not operate independently of delusion.
Furthermore, they are contingent on delusion in that delusion is the primary factor.
Up to the end of the first sentence shows that delusion here refers to grasping at true existence.
The statement that attachment and so on do not operate independently of delusion indicates that they function in association with delusion, not divorced of it.
The reason for this is presented in the passage that reads “Attachment and so on” up to “imputed by delusion.”
Since attractive and unattractive qualities are superimposed by incorrect mentation, which is in fact a cause of attachment and aversion, the passage here does not identify the mode of apprehension of attachment and aversion themselves.
Therefore the phrase “upon the nature of things imputed by delusion” is to be understood to mean that attachment and aversion operate on the basis of superimposing intrinsically existing qualities of attractiveness and unattractiveness.
The passage is not saying that it is only the true existence superimposed by delusion that constitutes the focal object of attachment and so on — that is, in the differentiation between the focus and aspect [of these emotions].
This is because, between the two facets of the object of the two innate self-graspings — their focal object and their object in terms of apprehending aspect — their focal objects do exist as established bases.
And since afflictions such as attachment are concomitant with delusion, their focal object is the same as that of the delusion.
This means attachment and aversion are defined by their aspects of attraction toward an object and repulsion from an object induced by the two types of incorrect mentation.
So states of mind with aspects of wanting or not wanting induced by grasping at persons as self-sufficient, substantial realities alone is not defined here as attachment and aversion.
Therefore the way in which attachment and aversion are defined is also quite different here. “
Furthermore, they are contingent on delusion” means that it is through the initial delusion of grasping at things as existing by way of their characteristics that attachment and aversion are brought forth.
The analogy of body faculty and its connection to the body illustrates that, just as there is no support for the other four sense faculties that is discrete from the body, similarly all the afflictions operate with delusion as their support and not divorced from delusion.
Because of this, all the afflictions will become undone if delusion is destroyed.
Thus, Āryadeva says, we should revere the discourse on dependent origination in terms of the emptiness of intrinsic existence, which is its antidote.
This grasping at true existence of things is described in Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness as the ignorance that is the root of cyclic existence; and Sixty Verses of Reasoning also says: Having found a locus, one is caught by the twisting snake of the afflictions.
Those whose minds have no locus will not be snared by such a snake.
Thus it says that if one finds any locus as the focus of objectification for grasping at true existence, one will then be snared by the snake of the afflictions.
Immediately after this stanza, it says: In those whose minds have a locus, why would the grave poison of afflictions not arise?
This then is the excellent standpoint of the noble Nāgārjuna.
In a comment linking these last two lines to the preceding ones, one reads in Candrakīrti’s commentary on Sixty Stanzas the following: To demonstrate that it is impossible for those who objectify forms and so on to relinquish the afflictions, though they might aspire to, Nāgārjuna states the following. . . .”
And in subsequent comments too it says: Now if one objectifies things as real entities, then myriad afflictions like attachment will emerge inexorably.
Why?
Because in the event something appeals to one’s mind, it would be difficult to avert attachment toward it.
In the event one’s mind finds it unappealing, however, it would then be difficult to avert aversion and hostility toward it.
Even if the object happens to be something that is neither appealing nor unappealing, the commentary states, ignorance will still arise in relation to it.
Therefore, while the apprehension of things as existing by way of their own characteristics remains present within in one’s mind, it is maintained that either attachment or aversion will arise; and even if these two are absent, instances of delusion will continue to arise.
The Guide to the Bodhisattva Way too says: The mind that takes focal objects will get stuck on one or another; and the mind divorced of emptiness when ceased will arise again, just as in the meditative attainment of nondiscrimination.
In this regard, there is no difference between these two masters Candrakīrti and Śāntideva and Buddhapālita when it comes to the interpretation of the intention of the noble Nāgārjuna.
An implication of this important point is this: The presentation that one could attain nirvana through only the path of the sixteen characteristics such as impermanence becomes provisional, and the identification of the afflictions based on such a presentation of the path remains incomplete as well.
One can, from this discussion, also understand other afflictions such as conceit.
With respect to ignorance, identity view, and the view grasping at extremes as defined in this unique way too, one should understand that each consists of two levels: the acquired and the innate. Fearing excessive length here, I will not spell out these issues in greater detail.
Similarly, there is the presentation where the conceptualization of grasping at things as true existence is characterized as what is to be relinquished on the path of meditation, differentiating it into nine levels of small, medium, and great, and correlating these to their corresponding antidotes — namely, the nine stages of the path of meditation.
This too should be understood as being provisional, a teaching presented for the benefit of those who, for the time being, are not capable of fully realizing both the coarse and subtle levels of selflessness of phenomena.
This is analogous to the teaching where the conceptualization grasping at subject-object duality is differentiated into nine levels in terms of lesser, medium, and greater degrees, each correlated with its relevant antidotes vis-à-vis the nine stages of the path of meditation, which too remains provisional.How the merely conventional appears or does not appear to the three individuals
Entities, though not possessing intrinsic existence, appear to childish ordinary beings to do so, and through this they deceive such beings.
In contrast, for the three classes of persons referred to above, who are different from these ordinary childish beings, things remain contrived entities that are dependently originated; for them they exist as mere conventionalities, not truly existent.
And these entities appear to the āryas abiding in the stages subsequent to meditative equipoise — stages where one remains within the sphere of perceptual experience tainted by ignorance and its habitual propensities. This is because they possess a form of ignorance that is not afflicted but is characterized as an obscuration to knowledge.
In contrast, the entities do not appear at all to āryas who are abiding in meditative equipoise, for they are devoid of perceptions.
"How does one define the obscuration to knowledge according to this Candrakīrti tradition then?"
In this regard, the Commentary says: Now, the habitual propensity toward ignorance constitutes the obstacle to thorough comprehension of the object of knowledge.
And that habitual propensities toward attachment, aversion, and so on exist is indicated by their corresponding physical and verbal actions, which are also their causes.
These habitual propensities toward ignorance, attachment, and so on cease for the omniscient and the buddhas alone, not for others.
The physical and verbal actions" here refer to such behaviors as those present even in an arhat, such as jumping about like a monkey or calling someone a "lowly commoner," physical and verbal deportment proscribed by the Buddha that they still have not curtailed.
"Also" indicates that the habitual propensities toward attachment and so on are obstacles to fully comprehending objects of knowledge as well.
Thus the habitual propensities of afflictions are obscurations to knowledge, and included within this class of obscurations are all the facets of deluded dualistic perceptions as well, which are the effects of those habitual propensities.
Of the two types of habitual propensities toward afflictions - one in the form of a seed of the afflictions and the other not in the form of such a seed - it is the latter that is understood to constitute the obscuration to knowledge.
As such [with respect to the three classes of persons cited above], because all the seeds of the afflictions have ceased for them, grasping at true existence no longer arises in them.
Nonetheless, since they remain tainted by the habitual propensity toward ignorance, cognitions deluded with respect to their appearing objects still arise in them.
Since āryas who have yet to attain buddhahood have still not eliminated ignorance belonging to the class of obscurations to knowledge, the two states - post-equipoise states characterized by dualistic conceptual thoughts and meditative equipoise devoid of perceptions - will occur intermittently.
In contrast, given that the buddhas have thoroughly comprehended or directly realized the aspects of both the ultimate and conventional truths of all phenomena, for them all turnings of conceptualizing mind and mental factors have come to cease permanently.
Buddhas, therefore, have no intermittent meditative equipoise and post-equipoise states involving conceptual thoughts characterized by perceptions.
The term “permanently” indicates that the ceasing for the other āryas during their meditative equipoise is only intermittent.
Because of this, meditative equipoise and post-equipoise states occur sequentially for them.
The rationale “because they experience ignorance that belongs to the class of obscurations to knowledge” is not a reason to demonstrate that possess perceptions; it is an explanation to substantiate the point that for them the absence and presence of dualistic perceptions alternate in line with periods of equipoise and post-equipoise.
The “turnings of mind and mental factors” is to be understood in terms of conceptualizing thoughts.
For example, Clear Words says: Conceptualizing processes constitute the turnings of the mind.
Because suchness is devoid of this, it is absent of conceptualization.
It says in a sutra, for example, “What is the ultimate truth?
That for which if there are no turnings of the mind; what need is there at all then to speak of the words?”
How the ultimate and conventional become as such from the perspectives of ordinary beings and āryas The Commentary says: That which is the ultimate for ordinary beings is merely conventional for those āryas who possess the sphere of experience within which dualistic perceptions remain.
Emptiness, the nature of these entities, is the ultimate truth for them.
The meaning of the first part is this: Phenomena such as vases, which ordinary beings grasp as possessing ultimate existence, remain merely conventional for the three classes of āryas referred to above, who experience dualistic perceptions in post-equipoise states after arising from meditative equipoise.
Thus Candrakīrti’s statement negates such phenomena to be true for these beings.
It does not negate these to be conventional truths for them, and it also does not suggest that the conceived objects of ordinary beings who grasp vases and so on as having ultimate existence becomes conventional for the āryas. Such conceived objects have no existence at all.
As for the latter part of the citation, it states that the ultimate nature of things, which is the nature of the dependently originated conventional truths, is the ultimate for the āryas.
So to assert that one and the same thing — a vase, for example — is itself a conventional truth for ordinary beings and an ultimate truth for the āryas contravenes the meaning of the text.
Such an utterance reveals an ignorance of the fact that to establish something as a conventional truth entails that it is negated as true within the perspective of that cognition.
Next, the Commentary reads,
What is ultimate for the buddhas is true nature alone.
Because it never deceives, it is the ultimate truth, and it is known by buddhas alone.
The word “alone” in “it is true nature alone” is a term of exclusion; it excludes in that it demonstrates how [the ultimate of the buddhas] is unlike the shifting characteristics of the other āryas for whom the ultimate truth is posited as absent of dualistic perceptions during meditative equipoise but characterized by dualistic perceptions in post-equipoise.
Thus it suggests that what is ultimate for buddhas constitutes the ultimate nature of things, which is the true nature upon which buddhas remain equipoised at all times.
The purpose of the statement “Because it never deceives . . .” is to define the meaning of the truth as “that which abides as undeceiving from the perspective of seeing suchness,” so as to demonstrate how such ultimate truth does not constitute true existence.
Ultimate truth
This has two parts: explaining the meaning of the lines of the root text and rejecting objections against this explanation.
Explaining the meaning of the lines of the root text The first is as follows: Through the force of an eye disease, one perceives false things such as floating hairs and so on; those with clear vision see what is actually so.
Understand suchness to be like this as well. [Here the Commentary says:] Now I wish to present ultimate truth.
Because ultimate truth cannot be expressed by words, because it is not an object of cognition that follows from the words, it cannot be presented directly.
To help elucidate its nature, I will give those who wish to listen an analogy drawn from the ordinary person’s experience.
The meaning of the statement that ultimate truth is not an object of cognition is as indicated by the phrase “it cannot be presented directly.”
In Naktso’s translation, this phrase appears as “cannot be shown in a direct demonstration.”
As to the meaning of this point, there is the following from Clear Words, when Candrakīrti comments on Nāgārjuna’s statement that suchness cannot be known from others: When someone with myodesopsia sees false realities such as floating hairs, even though the person who free of the eye malady may show him the other person remains incapable of perceiving the fact as it is — he is incapable of perceiving the absence of floating hairs in the way in which the person without myodesopsia does.
The person who has no myodesopsia, Candrakīrti says, might point to the one who has it and say, “There are no floating hairs here,” but that does not mean the other person will then perceive the absence of floating hair in the same way as the person without myodesopsia.
The point is that the listener does not perceive the absence of floating hairs the way the one without the eye malady does.
This does not mean, however, that the other person does not understand the absence of floating hair whatsoever. Taking this as an analogy, when suchness is presented, Candrakīrti maintains, although the listener does not realize it in the way those who are free of ignorance’s taint perceive it, this does not mean that, in general, they do not realize suchness at all.
Therefore it is not the case at all that ultimate truth cannot be taught in the definitive scriptures about the profound truth, that it cannot be expressed by the speech that reveals it, or that it cannot be realized by cognitions that arise from such statements.
This understanding should be applied in all contexts where suchness is characterized as not being the object of cognition and words.
Through the force of the eyes being affected by an eye disease, someone afflicted with such a malady perceives false things as such as floating hairs in a dinner bowl — one made from rhinoceros horn perhaps — held in the hands.
The phrase “and so on” indicates things like flies.
To remove them, the person may try and shake the bowl again and again.
Someone with clear vision, on seeing this, might approach that person who sees hair and so on, who might direct his attention there.
But not only will he not perceive hair and such, he will also have no conceptions of any properties predicated on such hair.
And when the person with myodesopsia shares his thoughts with the one who is free of disease, saying, “I see floating hairs,” the one free of myodesopsia, wanting to dispel the false thoughts of the one affected by the disease, may for the benefit of the other utter words to negate this, saying, “There are no floating hairs.”
Nevertheless, in so saying, such a speaker is by no means denigrating the phenomenon of floating hair.
In fact, it is only the one who is free of myodesopsia, not the one with the disease, who sees what is actually so pertaining to the supposed floating hairs seen by the one with myodesopsia.
And as with these two examples [of one afflicted by myodesopsia and other not], understand suchness to be like this as well, which is the referent of the analogy.
Understand this as follows.
The reality of the aggregates, elements, sense bases and so on perceived by those who do not see suchness and those whose mind is tainted or adversely affected by the eye malady of ignorance is the conventional nature of the aggregates and so on, analogous to the perception of floating hairs by someone with myodesopsia.
That very reality of the aggregates and so on that are perceived by those who do not see their suchness is in fact perceived by the buddhas — who are free of the obscuration to knowledge in the form of habitual propensities toward ignorance — in a manner similar to those whose vision is unaffected by eye malady and thus do not perceive floating hairs and so on, and this nature of the aggregates and so on is the ultimate truth for the buddhas.
Rejecting objections against this explanation.
Let me explain how this fault does not follow.
To begin with, there are two modes by which a buddha’s gnosis perceives objects of knowledge: () the way in which all that is knowable within the sphere of ultimate truth is known and () the way in which all that is knowable within the sphere of conventional truth is known.
Of these, the first is the knowing of suchness in a manner of not seeing the diverse appearances of the conventional truth.
As for the second, since an indirect knowing — knowing but not directly perceiving it — cannot be posited in relation to a buddha, conventional realities must be known by a buddha on the basis of directly perceiving them.
So within the perspective of a buddha’s gnosis perceiving things in their diversity, the buddha perceives conventional realities in a manner where the subject and its object do appear as distinct.
Now it is not that a buddha’s knowledge of things in their diversity perceives aggregates and so on because it is affected by habitual propensities of ignorance.
Nevertheless, a buddha must perceive the appearances experienced by other beings whose cognitions are tainted by ignorance.
There is no denying that such appearances do exist, and if such conventional truths exist, it must be perceived by buddha’s gnosis pertaining to things in their diversity.
In the case of the analogy, however, though there is no appearance of floating hairs and such for the visual perception of someone free of myodesopsia, this does not entail that such an appearance does not exist at all.
In this respect it is different from the case of the buddha.
Until the habitual propensities toward erroneous dualistic appearances cease, one is not capable of generating direct realization of things in their diversity and the way things really are within a singular instance of knowing.
Until then one cognizes the two in alternation, one during meditative equipoise and the other during post-equipoise states. Thus the knowing of the two within a single instance of wisdom does not occur.
Once all habitual propensities toward error are eliminated, the two aspects of the buddha’s gnosis arise uninterruptedly as a singular instance of knowing within each and every individual moment.
As such there is no need for a temporal sequence for the direct realization of the two objects of knowledge.
Therefore the following statement contains no contradiction: Even with a single instance of knowing, he pervades the entire field of knowledge.
This feature that the two dimensions of gnosis, which are identical in nature, have not the slightest contradiction in knowing the two objects simultaneously appears to be a characteristic unique to the buddhas.
There are some who appear to take the mode of knowing ultimate truth alone to be the buddha’s mode of knowing and denigrate the buddha’s knowing of things in their diversity, asserting that such knowing is absent in the buddha’s own mind and exists only within the mental continuum of trainees.
Some appear to claim that even the gnosis knowing the way things really are is absent in the buddha’s mind, thus denigrating both aspects of the buddha’s gnosis.
I will address some of the remaining related points below in the section on the resultant ground.
Isn’t it the case that such nature, which is constituted by the dissolution of all dualistic appearances, is not seeable?
So how it is that the buddhas see such ultimate truth?
Since all dualistic appearances have ceased within the perspective of seeing suchness, it is true that suchness is not seen in a dualistic manner.
Nonetheless, we do speak of seeing suchness in a manner of nonseeing.
Here is how the statement above suitably responds to the objection raised: it states that the buddha’s gnosis that directly knows the way things really are does see the suchness of aggregates and so on; the fact that the aggregates and so on are not established from the perspective of that seeing is itself the suchness of these phenomena; and that such gnosis therefore sees the suchness of the aggregates and so on in a manner of not seeing.
Thus the Commentary states: He directly perceives the true nature alone without touching the produced entities themselves.
Having fully realized this nature, he is called an awakened one.
Here Candrakīrti is saying that a buddha’s gnosis that knows ultimate truth actualizes the ultimate nature of things alone without touching their bases.
This has the same meaning as the statement that the buddha’s gnosis sees the suchness of the aggregates and so on in a manner of not seeing the aggregates and so on themselves.
As for the meaning of the citation “No seeing is the sublime seeing,” it is not suggesting that one accepts not seeing anything at all as a form of seeing.
Rather, as explained above, not seeing conceptual elaborations is defined as seeing the absence of elaborations.
Therefore, seeing and not seeing are not being defined in relation to one single thing.
This said, the Condensed Perfection of Wisdom states: He sees no form, nor does he see feelings as well; he sees no discriminations, nor does he see volitions; he sees no consciousness, nor mind and mentality, this is seeing reality, so taught the Tathāgata.
People utter words like “I see space.”
"How do they see space?" This we will examine here.
Seeing reality is shown to be likewise by the Tathāgata; such seeing cannot be conveyed by any other analogy.
Here, what is not seen is stated to be the five aggregates while what is seen is referred to as “reality,” which means suchness.
This is similar to the statement “He who sees dependent origination sees reality.
Space, given here as an analogy, is defined in terms of the mere absence of obstructive property, and so seeing or perceiving it entails not seeing what is to be negated — namely, a space-obstructing property that if it existed would have to be perceivable.
Here, what is seen is space while what is not seen is the property of obstructing space.
Just as in this analogy, not seeing should be understood in terms of not seeing suchness in a manner similar to seeing a blue color, a manner of seeing negated in the final line of the citation.
To substantiate the assertion that the buddha’s gnosis sees suchness in a manner of not seeing, Candrakīrti cites the Entering the Two Truths Sutra: O celestial child, if the ultimate truth, on the ultimate level, takes on the nature of being an object of body, speech, and mind, it would then not belong to what is called ultimate truth.
It would become a conventional truth only.
Instead, O celestial child, on the ultimate level, ultimate truth transcends all conventions.
It has no differentiation; it’s unborn, unceasing, free of what is uttered as well as of utterances, and free of what is known and knowing.
The meaning of the first part of the sutra citation is this: If ultimate truth, from the perspective of seeing the ultimate truth, is not seen in a manner of not seeing conventional truths such as the aggregates but instead becomes an object within the field of experience of body, speech, and mind, like the aggregates and so on, then such a seen truth would not be ultimate truth.
It would become a conventional truth, a conceptual elaboration.
Understood thus, this first part of the sutra citation becomes a reason explaining how a buddha’s gnosis sees the ultimate truth in a manner of not seeing.
The second part of the sutra citation has the meaning that, from the perspective that directly sees ultimate truth, there can be no differentiation — varied instantiations — within ultimate truth.
The next three attributes [being unborn, unceasing, and beyond conventions] are easy to comprehend.
The phrase about the ultimate truth being, from such a perspective, free of the activity of speech is easily understood as well.
Although one can posit the gnosis directly perceiving the ultimate truth as the knower and ultimate truth as the known object, there is no contradiction in maintaining that, from the perspective of such gnosis, there is no such act and its agent.
This is because the distinction between the two — an act and its agent — is posited from the standpoint of cognitions related to conventional truth alone.
It is like the case where, although one can posit an inferential rational cognition of emptiness as the subject and ultimate truth as its object, the distinction of the two as subject and object is not posited from within the perspective of that rational cognition.
Next, the Commentary goes on to cite: O celestial child, this ultimate truth, which is endowed with all supreme qualities, transcends being an object up through a buddha’s omniscient gnosis . . .
It does not exist in the manner expressed in the statement “This is ultimate truth.”
All phenomena are false in that they are deceptive realities.
The meaning of this citation is as follows.
Up to the phrase “up through a buddha’s omniscient gnosis” indicates how ultimate truth transcends being the object of the omniscient gnosis.
As to the sense in which ultimate truth transcends [such gnosis], this is indicated by the next part that reads, “It does not exist in the manner expressed . . .”
up to the end, where it reads “deceptive realities.”
As an example, when someone says, “This is ultimate truth,” the subject and object appear as two distinct entities to the thought that follows after that utterance.
For the buddha’s omniscient gnosis perceiving the way things really are, however, ultimate truth lies beyond the sphere of knowing it in such a dualistic manner.
All phenomena within dualistic perception are false and deceptive, and as such, they do not exist from the perspective that perceives only the undeceiving truth of suchness.
All of these authoritative sources substantiate the point that, within the perspective of direct seeing of suchness, conventional realities like aggregates and so on are not perceived.
For within the perspective of direct seeing of suchness, all dualistic elaborations like “things and nonthings” remain impossible because these conceptual elaborations cannot be found within such a perspective.
Thus when contemplating suchness, only āryas are valid with respect to suchness in a manner that is direct; non-āryas are not valid in such direct manner.
In view of this, the rejection of arising from other is done from the perspective of āryas; it cannot be invalidated by perspectives stemming from the everyday world.
Objections to the assertion that worldly perception invalidates the refutation If ordinary perception constitutes valid knowledge, suchness will be seen by common folk. What need for the āryas then? And what need for ārya paths? Yet it’s wrong to take the foolish mind as valid as well. Since ordinary perception has no validity in every respect, no worldly perspective can invalidate in the context of suchness.
Now the opponent might wish to raise objections from the everyday world to the refutation of arising from other on the ultimate level.
Had we here admitted that perceptions of the everyday world were authoritative in the sphere of inquiring into the nature of suchness, such objections might be appropriate.
For if ordinary perception constitutes valid knowledge with respect to suchness, suchness will then be seen or directly realized by common worldly folk.
And given that this situation would have to have been true since beginningless time, one would then have to admit that common people have eliminated ignorance. In that case, what need is there for the āryas then, who are others, for direct realization of suchness?
And what need is there then for seeking the ārya paths? There will be no point in doing so.
Yet it is wrong to take the foolish mind of ordinary people as valid with respect to suchness as well.
Since ordinary perception has no validity in every respect in the context of inquiring into suchness, no worldly perspective can invalidate in the context of suchness.
Some, taking the phrase “Since ordinary perception has no validity in every respect” as a rejection of any notion of valid cognition, criticize this system as an inferior tradition.
Others, citing the same reason, extol it as an excellent system.
Both interpretations make assertions without properly understanding the standpoint of this master, thus revealing their own true selves.
This is because both parties apparently take the statement that worldly perspectives are never authoritative in every respect when it comes to suchness to mean that valid cognition cannot be accepted in any context.
Insofar as valid cognition and its object are concerned, these must be understood as they are explained in Clear Words, where valid cognitions and their objects are negated as existing by virtue of an essence and are presented instead as mutually defined.
I will expound more on this below.
In that case,” one might ask, “what is the manner in which the worldly perspective might invalidate?”
Now, if everyday facts acknowledged and established by the world are rejected from the perspective of worldly consensus, then [the standpoint of] this person will be invalidated on the authority of everyday experience.
Say a person states that “Someone stole a substance of mine!”
Another person asks him, “What kind of substance?”
to which he replies, “A vase.”
Now if, in response, the other person retorts, “A vase is not substance because it is a cognizable object, like the vase in a dream,” it is the content of this kind of refutation that is undermined by the perspectives of the world.
In contrast, when it comes to the presentation of suchness, which is done on the basis of taking one who is learned in ultimate truth as authoritative, taking into account the āryas’ perspective on the ultimate truth, in such a context, there can be no invalidation stemming from the perspectives of the everyday world.
The Commentary states that “The learned ones should analyze other [similar] questions on that basis as well. ”
These include such refutations as “I am not the owner of the vase, and Devadatta is not the one who stole it, because [Devadatta and I lack intrinsic existence].”
Similarly, when someone says, “It grew at my farm,” and another asks, “What is grown?”
to which he replies, “A sprout.”
Say then that the other person counters, "A sprout is devoid of arising because it is a cognizable object" and "just like a dream person or a dream sprout."
Repelling objections from the worldly perspective on the basis that arising from other does not exist even in worldly convention.
So far we have rejected there being any problem refuting arising from other from the perspective of the world, even if one were to allow for the sake of argument arising from other from the standpoint of worldly convention. We will now explain how, given that arising from other does not exist even within the perceptions of the world, there can be no invalidation coming from the world, even for someone who wishes to negate arising from other while remaining within the worldly view. This is stated by the following:
In everyday experience, a man who simply left the seed claims "I fathered this son!" or thinks "I planted this tree." So arising from other doesn't exist even from the perspective of the everyday world.
Why is it that, in everyday experience, a man points to another person with male characteristics and claims "I fathered this son?"
Though he may claim this, the father has not extracted from his body a person with full male features and somehow implanted him into the womb of the mother.
What is it then?
He has simply left or placed the mere seed of the son, an impure substance, inside the mother's womb.
So the father, having placed the cause of the son, points to someone to be his son.
This clearly proves that within the everyday experience of the world, people do not conceive the seed and the son to be intrinsically different.
So, even from the perspective of the everyday world, grasping at the impure seed and the son as well as the barley seed and its sprout as arising from other doesn't exist.
For were these conceived as different by virtue of their own essences, the father would not point to his son and claim "I produced him" any more than a different person would in relation to that son.
Similarly, when someone plants the mere seed of a tree and a tree grows from this, he thinks "I planted this tree."
In relation to this example too, one should reflect, as above, "there is no arising from other within the perspectives of everyday world" and so on.
Although the two seeds planted are not the tree and the son, when a tree or a son is born as a result of having planted either of these two seeds, one can point to one or the other and claim legitimately, “I planted this.”
Analogously, although a hand that is injured and healed is not actually the person, one can legitimately say the person has been injured and healed when his hand was injured and healed.
Thus arising from other does not exist within the conventions of the everyday world.
But that does not mean that the existence of arising from other can be negated through everyday-world perceptions.
This is because one must probe the nature of suchness to negate cause and effect being different entities by virtue of their intrinsic natures.
Therefore the sense of arising from other asserted by proponents of other philosophical schools is this: arising from something that is other by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic; it is not something established simply as other.
It is also not the case that this sort of mere otherness is not established from the everyday-world perspective.
Now the statement “So other-arising doesn’t exist / even from the perspective of the everyday world” should not be confined to mean solely that ordinary people of the world do not grasp a substantial cause and its effect — a seed and the sprout, for example — to be different by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics.
These lines also demonstrate how arising from other does not exist even on the conventional level.
For example, the Commentary says in the section on the refutation of arising from both: So, just as it has been shown how arising from self and arising from other are untenable on the level of worldly convention as well as on the level of ultimate truth, likewise, to those who speak of arising from both too, the arguments stated above demonstrate it to be impossible.
Thus the nonexistence of arising from other even on the conventional level has been stated explicitly.
In Clear Words too, in response to the question “If there is no arising of things from themselves, from other, from both, and from no cause, how is it that the Buddha taught ‘Conditioned by ignorance, there is volition’?”
Candrakīrti writes, “Let me explain this.
This is on the conventional level; not on the level of suchness. ”
Thus he explains how the engendering of volition by ignorance and so on is on the conventional level and not on the ultimate level.
Then, in response to the question “What kind of presentation of conventional truth you are speaking of?”
Candrakīrti replies, “We accept the establishment of conventional truth in terms of mere conditionedness; not on the basis of adhering to any of the four positions.”
Thus he clearly explains how, in accepting the arising of this from that condition on the conventional level, he does not adhere to arising from one of the four possibilities.
So the assertion some make that “This tradition does not reject arising from other on the conventional level” is a statement that does not understand this system properly.
The merits of refuting arising from other
A system that, as explained above, propounds the absence of real entity in the form of intrinsic existence has the merit of not falling into the extremes of eternalism and nihilism because it affirms dependent origination that is free of eternalism and annihilationism.
To demonstrate this: Because the sprout is no other than the seed, there is no extinction of the seed at the time of the sprout; and because the sprout and seed are not identical, it cannot be said that seed exists when the sprout is there.
If the sprout were intrinsically other than the seed, the seed and the sprout could not be a cause and its effect.
In that event, the seed’s continuum would certainly cease once the sprout exists.
The seed and the sprout would be totally unrelated, and so even if the sprout were present, this would not in any way preserve the lineage of the seed.
To illustrate, the presence of a cow-like beast in no way ensures the non-cessation of a cow’s lineage after death.
Likewise, the presence of ordinary beings in no way ensures āryas do not sever the continuum of their own cyclic existence.
Because there is no contradiction for the seed and the sprout to be cause and effect even when the sprout is not intrinsically other than the seed, there is no extinction of the lineage of the seed at the time of the sprout. In this way, one avoids the extreme of annihilationism.
It has on numerous occasions been explained that the seed comes to cease at the time of the sprout, and the meaning of seed’s extinction has been explained in the Commentary as the termination of its continuity.
Furthermore, the nondisintegration of the seed is rejected as well.
Therefore the phrase “cessation of the seed’s continuum” here has to be understood in terms of the cessation of its lineage.
And because the two, the sprout and the seed, do not exist as identical, and also because the seed did not transpose itself onto the sprout, the non-disintegration of seed at the time of the sprout has been rejected.
So it cannot be said that seed exists when the sprout is there; hence the extreme of eternalism is prevented as well.
These statements convey the intent of the following lines from the Play in Full Sutra: If the seed exists, the sprout would be the same.
What is the seed? It is not the sprout; it is not something other nor is it identical with it; thus it’s neither eternal nor annihilated.
Such is their truth.
The meaning of these lines is as follows. Were the seed to exist, the sprout, which is caused by the seed, would come into being in the same manner as the seed.
Now when the sprout comes into being, it cannot do so from something other than the seed, and so one might think that the seed and the sprout are identical in nature.
The sutra states that although the sprout does not come into being from something different from the seed, it is not that the seed comes to transpose itself onto the sprout.
Why?
Because the sprout is neither intrinsically other from the seed nor is it intrinsically identical with it in nature.
When both of these possibilities are rejected, the true nature of the sprout is revealed to be a reality that is free of the extremes of eternalism and nihilism.
The same sutra states this point in the following: The volitions are conditioned by ignorance; such volitions do not exist in ultimate reality.
Both volition and ignorance are empty, for they lack intrinsically real movement.
The first line presents the logical reason — that volitions originate in dependence upon ignorance.
The second line presents the thesis, which is that the volitions do not exist in ultimate reality.
The third line presents how both the cause and effect are empty.
And the fourth line presents the manner in which they are empty. “
Movement” here refers to activity of conditioning, and the lack of this indicates how volition is empty of volition.
This too is stated with the proviso “they lack intrinsically real movement,” indicating how what is being negated is qualified.
This qualification has the same meaning as the phrase “do not exist in ultimate reality.”
In Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way too, the meaning of this sutra citation is presented as the following: That which originates in dependence on something is not, on the one hand, identical with that other, but neither is it different from it.
It is therefore neither eternal nor annihilated.
How intrinsic arising does not exist in any manner.
This has two parts: refuting the view that asserts existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristics and rejecting objections raised against such a refutation.
Refuting the view that asserts existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristics.
This has three parts: the consequence that an ārya’s meditative equipoise would become the cause for the destruction of things, the consequence that conventional truths would withstand reasoned analysis, and the consequence that ultimate arising would not be negated.
The consequence that an ārya’s meditative equipoise would become the cause for the destruction of things.
If the intrinsic characteristics of things were to arise dependently,
things would come to be destroyed by denying it; emptiness would then be a cause for the destruction of things. But this is illogical, so no real entities exist.
Candrakīrti states, “One must accept without doubt the statement ‘There is no intrinsic arising with respect to any phenomenon.’”
So, logically, this is a point we must definitely accept.
We should not assert the contrary, saying, “It is not appropriate in this tradition to posit a standpoint.”
Now, in contrast, if the intrinsic characteristic of a thing such as form or feelings were to arise in dependence upon causes and conditions, through its own essence, this would imply that a yogi directly perceiving the emptiness of intrinsic existence of all phenomena would realize emptiness by denying such a nature of things.
Meditative equipoise does not actually perceive form and so on, but if they were to exist through their intrinsic characteristics, then meditative equipoise would necessarily perceive them. It does not.
And if this were so, these things would then become nonexistent.
If they do become nonexistent, it would then be the case that what was existent prior to the meditative equipoise would subsequently come to be destroyed or ceased.
The meditative equipoise would become the cause for their destruction.
So just as hammers and the like are causes for the destruction of vases and the like, seeing emptiness too would then be a cause for the destruction of the nature of things, thus denigrating them.
But this is illogical, so no real entities exist — that is, say, by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics — and we must never uphold such a notion of intrinsic arising.
Now, those Mādhyamikas who accept arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristics do maintain that even though things exist through their intrinsic characteristics, this does not constitute an admission of true existence.
They assert that if phenomena such as forms exist through their intrinsic characteristics, this does not necessarily entail that they are perceived within the direct vision of suchness.
They may claim such things, but that this degree of objectivity does in fact constitute true existence has already been explained above. I will elaborate on this point further below as well.
So the opponent cannot avoid the flaws revealed in this argument above.
Here as well in the Commentary, Candrakīrti cites the following passage from the Heap of Jewels Sutra: Kāśyapa, furthermore, the middle path perfectly discerning reality does not make phenomena to be empty.
Phenomena are themselves empty . . .
Candrakīrti cites similar statements in that sutra in relation to signlessness, wishlessness, and the absence of conditioning, as well as to being unborn and unoriginated.
Now, if phenomena were to possess natures that exist through their intrinsic characteristics, then these phenomena would not be empty.
And then the sutra’s statement that “phenomena are themselves empty” would become incorrect.
Since existence in its own right by virtue of an essence is not then negated, things will have to be shown to be empty of something else.
This of course will contradict the sutra’s statement that “emptiness does not cause phenomena to become empty.”
All of this shows how the middle path, by examining the individual characteristics of phenomena, reveals how all phenomena are empty of existing in their own right — that is, existing by virtue of their own essence.
This sutra also rejects the assertion of the Cittamātra school that the dependent nature is not empty of existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristic but is empty in the sense of being devoid of a substantial duality of subject and object.
It says in Four Hundred Stanzas: It’s not that what is not empty is seen as empty; if one harbors the thought “May nirvana be mine,” one cannot attain nirvana through such a false view.
So taught the Tathāgata.
Fundamental Wisdom as well presents the meaning of the sutra cited above: The Conqueror has stated that emptiness eliminates all [metaphysical] views.
So he who views emptiness [as real], this the Buddha called incurable.
This then is also the intended meaning of the statement that all phenomena are empty of their own essence.
Therefore it is totally incorrect to assert that a vase being empty of true existence but not being empty of itself constitutes extrinsic emptiness and that the vase being empty of the vase itself constitutes intrinsic emptiness.
For if the vase were empty of itself, the vase would not exist in a vase.
And if something, say a vase, does not exist in itself, since it cannot exist in any other thing either, this implies that the vase does not exist at all.
This will be equally true of all other things as well, and so the person uttering such statements would also not exist.
This renders the entire discourse about emptiness — something being empty of this but not of that — totally impossible.
Now some people assert this form of emptiness [a thing being empty of itself] to be a perfect view while others hold it to be a nihilistic emptiness.
Both of these remain, however, outside the true understanding of dependent origination free from the extremes of eternalism and nihilism, which has been established by the conqueror [Nāgārjuna] and his spiritual heir [Āryadeva], not just once but repeatedly.
In particular, those who assert that the entire reality of conventional truths must be established as empty of themselves and assert this form of emptiness to constitute a nihilistic emptiness are utterly incorrect.
There is none among the four Buddhist philosophical schools that recognizes a particular view to be nihilistic yet cultivates it within their own mind.
The notion of emptiness generally entails that a given entity, the basis of negation, is demonstrated to not exist in a manner that is being negated or is shown to be empty of what is to be negated.
This much is the same for all forms of emptiness. It is, however, the emptiness of phenomena in the sense of being devoid of existing by virtue of intrinsic characteristic that constitutes the true meaning of things being empty of their own essence.
All other forms of emptiness do not constitute the emptiness of things’ own essence. Here is the reason.
As long as the impact of having established emptiness of the first type [intrinsic emptiness] by means of a valid cognition remains undiminished, there is no possibility at all during such a period for any reification of that basis to arise through grasping at true existence owing to any kind of philosophical reflection.
With respect to those other types of emptiness, however, though one may have established them through valid cognition and their impact remains undiminished, there is nothing to preclude, during the same period, reifying things as truly existent or as real due to philosophical speculation.
The consequence that conventional truths would withstand reasoned analysis [The Commentary says:]
Here, some assert the following: “It is logical that, since there is no arising on the ultimate level, arising from self and other are negated.
Nonetheless, insofar as the natures of form, feeling, and so on perceived by the two kinds of valid cognition are concerned, these will arise without doubt from [something that is] other.
For if one does not accept this, how can one speak of the two truths? There will be only one truth.
Therefore,” they say, “arising from other does exist. ”
Those who argue in the above manner, given that they appear to accept the absence of arising on the ultimate level but assert arising from other on the conventional level, are certain Svātantrika-Mādhyamikas.
Their assertion, "If arising from other in terms of intrinsic arising does not exist on the conventional level, there will then be only one truth," is intended to suggest that if there is no arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristic on the conventional level, conventional truth will have no reality.
Since conventional truth would be untenable, there would be only the ultimate truth.
In response, the Commentary says: You are right. From the point of view of ultimate truth, there are not two truths.
For we find statements such as the following: "O monks, this truth, the ultimate, is only one: it is nirvana, a reality that is nondeceptive.
All conditioned things are false and deceptive."
The meaning of these statements is this: Given that "nondeceptiveness" is what is meant by truth, a view Candrakīrti himself upholds, it is true that ultimate truth alone is true in the sense of being nondeceptive.
So Candrakīrti responds, "You are right."
The phrase "From the point of view of ultimate truth . . ."
indicates that, within the perspective of seeing suchness, there is no duality of conventional and ultimate truth. [
] Within such a perspective, the Buddha has spoken of only the ultimate truth.
The truth that is ultimate is to the ultimate truth.
That within such a perspective there exists no conventional truth can be understood by the statement that "conditioned things are false and deceptive."
To summarize the meaning [of the above Commentary passage]: Were phenomena to exist by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, conditioned things would not be established as false and deceptive.
And without conventional truth, there would be no two truths.
In contrast, when there is no existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristic, both conventional truth and ultimate truth become possible.
Based on the sutra citation above that states that nirvana alone is true while other conditioned phenomena are false, the thought might arise that although conditioned phenomena do not exist by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics, nirvana - the ultimate truth - must exist by virtue of its own intrinsic characteristic.
But the sutra itself defines the truth being referred to here in terms of nondeceptiveness, not in terms of existing by virtue of intrinsic characteristic.
Furthermore, from the statement that "All conditioned things are false and deceptive" too, we can infer that the meaning of truth in the sutra citation is that of nondeceptiveness.
In his Commentary on Sixty Stanzas too, Candrakīrti explains how, unlike conditioned phenomena, which deceive childish beings through appearing in false manner, nirvana does not deceive beings by appearing thus.
Hence, he explains, nirvana is said to be true while others remain untrue.
The distinction between truth and untruth here must therefore be drawn in the sense of being "nondeceptive" and "deceptive."
Candrakīrti's Commentary on Sixty Stanzas elsewhere makes a statement to the effect that nirvana is true on the conventional level.
There the meaning is that nirvana's status as an ultimate truth is to be posited from the perspective of conventional truth.
It is not that Candrakīrti accepts nirvana to be a conventional truth.
Since conventional truth is the means by which one enters ultimate truth, then just as one entertains conventions in the everyday world without probing into whether things arise from self or another, the Mādhyamika accepts [conventional truths] in the same [unanalyzed] manner.
[ To proceed with the root text:] Thus, when such phenomena are analyzed, nothing is found as their nature apart from suchness. So the conventional truth of the everyday world should not be subjected to thorough analysis.
Thus, when such phenomena as form, feelings, and so on are analyzed thoroughly, in terms such as "Does it arise from itself or does it arise from other?"
beyond the fact they do not arise or cease on the ultimate level — that is, apart from suchness as their nature — nothing else is found, no other or extra dimension such as arising and so on.
So the conventional truth of the everyday world should not be subjected to thorough analysis in terms such as "from itself, from other," and so on. [
] We should just accept the facts of worldly perception, captured in statements such as "If this exists, that follows." We should do this on the basis of participating in the conventions that are dependent on others — those of the world.
For example, Āryadeva says: Just as a barbarian cannot be sustained through a language other than his own, likewise worldly people cannot be sustained except through the conventions of the world.
Fundamental Wisdom too says: Without relying on conventions, ultimate truth cannot be realized.
Without realizing ultimate truth, nirvana cannot be attained.
And, Averting the Objections says: Without accepting conventions, we will not engage in exposition.
Here “analysis” and “nonanalysis” refer to analysis or nonanalysis pertaining to suchness.
And in this regard, it is critical to understand what mode of analysis constitutes an analysis into suchness, so I will explain this point a little.
In the Prāsaṅgika system, if one is unsatisfied with conventional designations, and in relation to statements such as “the sprout arises,” one analyzes what exactly is the referent of that phrase — does the sprout arise from itself, from another, and so on. From that point on, the analysis becomes an inquiry into suchness.
This is entirely different from everyday inquiries based on worldly conventions, such as “Where have you come from?” “ Where are you going?” “
Where is it, outside or inside?”
Svātantrika Madhyamaka, on the other hand, does not consider the above degree of analysis to constitute probing into suchness.
For them, an analysis becomes an inquiry into suchness when someone analyzes whether something exists by virtue of the power of being perceived by a cognition as defined above, or whether it exists objectively as not posited by virtue of being perceived by a cognition.
Thus, because of their two different ways of identifying the object of negation, two different boundaries of what constitutes an analysis into suchness emerge for them as well.
Failing to comprehend [what exactly constitutes an analysis into suchness], some define the distinction in the following manner. Say Devadatta has not arrived at a specific place.
Initially, one mistakenly thinks that he had arrived but subsequently, when one examines whether he has arrived, comes to realize that he has not.
In this way, they characterize all unanalyzed perspectives to be erroneous and all analyzed presentations to be veridical.
But such an approach is neither that of the Madhyamaka system nor that of Buddhist epistemological schools.
For one finds in both of these two traditions numerous facts established by valid cognition within the unanalyzed perspective.
I have addressed this question extensively elsewhere, so I will not elaborate further here.
In brief, we should understand that if one analyzes the facts of conventional truth through critical reasoning inquiring into suchness, all conventions of the everyday world will come to be undermined.
The consequence that ultimate arising would not be negated. In the context of suchness, certain reasoning disallows arising from self or from something other, and that same reasoning disallows them on the conventional level too. So by what means then is your arising established? [ Here, the Commentary states the following:]
Why is it that when all [the ropes of] clinging to things as true existence are cut, one clings terrified to conventional truth as real?
If you say, “We must ensure that some things do arise with a reality established by intrinsic characteristics or by virtue of substance, for they constitute the causes of bondage and freedom by being part of the afflicted class or the enlightened class,” to this I would say, “Now what remains for you are merely the words.”
Why?
In the context of an analysis into suchness or the ultimate truth, certain reasoning presented above disallows the arising of phenomena such as form from self or from something other.
Likewise, on the conventional level too, that same reasoning disallows them — the arising of form and so on through intrinsic characteristics.
So by what means of valid cognition then is your intrinsic arising established?
It is not. “ Therefore,” Candrakīrti states, “arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristic does not exist on either level of truth. You may not like this, but you should undeniably admit it nonetheless.”
As for the arising negated through an analysis into suchness even on the conventional level, the Commentary characterizes this — in his commentary preceding the relevant root text — as an arising possessing a reality borne of substance.
The [subsequent] summary statement explains it as well in the same manner. Therefore it refers only to [a form of arising] whereby what is to be negated is qualified in terms such as “arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristic.”
It in no way refers to arising per se.
For Candrakīrti states on countless occasions that it is inappropriate to apply ultimate analysis to the facts of conventional truth.
Why does Candrakīrti maintain that if the reasoning probing into suchness does not negate arising by virtue of intrinsic characteristic on the conventional level, it would mean that ultimately established arising remains not negated as well?
It is because the moment something is characterized as existing by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, this in itself constitutes true existence.
In that case, Candrakīrti maintains, it makes no difference whether one applies the qualifier “on the conventional level.”
Now there are countless instances in the sutras, in the writings of Nāgārjuna father and son, and in those of this master where the object of negation is qualified in terms such as “by virtue of intrinsic characteristic,” “through intrinsic nature,” “by virtue of an essence,” and so on.
Furthermore, as we saw above, Candrakīrti even takes some fellow Mādhyamikas to be the object of critique when he is engaged in such negation.
In his Clear Words too, Candrakīrti writes: Indisputably, it must be accepted exactly in this way.
Otherwise conventional truth will come to possess objective evidence, would it not?
In that case, it would then become suchness itself, not conventional.
Thus, when refuting the approach whereby, being unsatisfied with mere designations on the conventional level, one posits the facts of conventional truth on the basis of analyzing the referents of their designations, Candrakīrti objects that the facts in that case will become ultimately existent and that form and so on would then not be facts of conventional truth.
These consequences are being thrown against someone who rejects the ultimate existence of form and so on and takes them to be conventional.
Since this cannot be said of the proponents of real entities, it is very clear that the opponent here is Svātantrika Madhyamaka.
Master Candrakīrti also states in the Commentary that “Some assert that the refutation of arising by the noble Nāgārjuna in the treatise, in lines such as ‘Not from itself, not from other,’ refers to the rejection of arising in relation to the imputed nature whereby subject and object are conceived as being substantially different; it does not refer to the negation of the true existence of dependent nature.”
Since they cannot establish this claim without evidence, those who interpret thus deserve only to be disputed and examined.
Some early Tibetan scholars claim that the opponent here is Sthiramati, but such statements are not readily found in his works.
Dharmapāla, in his commentary on Four Hundred Stanzas, reputedly interprets the view of the Four Hundred to be Cittamātra; so it is more appropriate to relate this critique to Dharmapāla.
The question now is: “How do those who interpret the meaning of the profound sutras in Cittamātra terms explain the intent of the treatises of the noble Nāgārjuna?”
The works of great ones such as the master Vasubandhu contain no explicit statements about how they would interpret the meaning of Nāgārjuna’s treatises.
In works such as Rules of Exposition, basing himself on the Unraveling the Intent Sutra, Vasubandhu appears to characterize the Perfection of Wisdom sutras as provisional.
Thus we could assume he would explain Nāgārjuna’s treatises similarly.
It seems inconceivable that Vasubandhu would refute the noble Nāgārjuna’s treatises; but at the same time, if he were to explain them according to their literal meaning, then what reason would he have not to do the same for the Perfection of Wisdom sutras?
Now if he were to interpret Nāgārjuna’s works in nonliteral, interpretable terms, he would clearly do so from the Cittamātra standpoint.
This said, since those statements that present all phenomena as lacking ultimate existence and as not existing by virtue of their intrinsic characteristics are established to be literally true by means of reasoning, there is no effective objection to their literal meaning.
Hence these treatises cannot be explained as provisional, requiring further interpretation.
It is with this point in mind that Candrakīrti says, “They deserve only to be disputed and examined.”
The point of giving effective objections against a nonliteral reading and presenting countless proofs to support a straightforward reading is to establish that the meaning of Nāgārjuna’s treatises cannot be interpreted in some alternative manner.
Candrakīrti addresses this point only briefly here.
Rejecting objections raised against such a refutation. Empty things dependent on convergences, such as reflections and so on, are not unknown. And just as from an empty thing like a reflection a perception can arise that bears its form, likewise although all things are empty, they do arise from emptiness in a robust way.
Empty things such as reflections and so on, including echoes and the like, arise dependent on convergences of causes and conditions — the meeting of mirror and face, of a cave and the issuing of sound, and so forth: such things are not unknown to the world; they are well known.
And just as from something known to the world, an empty or false thing like a reflection, a perception such as that of the eyes can arise that bears its form, that of a reflection and the like.
In other words, from a false thing like a mirror image arises a perception bearing that false aspect.
Likewise although all things are empty of existence through their intrinsic characteristics, from causes that are empty of such an existence, effects that are empty of such an existence do arise in a robust way.
Here Candrakīrti speaks of the arising of a visual perception on the basis of a mirror image.
Now a mirror image is a conditioned thing, and since it is different in nature from cognition, it is an external reality.
Furthermore, since it is the objective condition of visual perception, Candrakīrti takes it to be a visible form.
We should also discern from this the status of phenomena such as a double moon, the appearance of floating hairs, a mirage, and so on, as well as echoes and similar examples.
The existence of things by virtue of intrinsic characteristics is perceived despite being impossible.
This is analogous to the existence of reflection as a face and so on being impossible and yet still being perceived as such.
Form, sound, and so on are analogous to phenomena like mirror images, echoes, and the like.
So, just as we would not take the intrinsic existence of the five sensory objects such as form to be external realities yet would posit the form and so on that are perceived as such to be external realities, likewise, although one would not regard the reflection of a face to be an externally real face, one can still characterize phenomena themselves, mirror images and so on, as external realities.
So when it comes to characterizing what is and is not an external reality, the situation is equal for both form and so on, on the one hand, and mirror images and so on, on the other.
The false nature of a reflection is something that can be established by all reasonable, literate people of the world whose minds are not informed by scripture or reasoning presenting emptiness.
So it is entirely wrong to say that the realization of this level of falsehood represents some kind of a coarse rational cognition of emptiness.
In that case, one might ask, when one comes to establish the false nature of a reflection along the lines familiar to the world, does this not establish falsehood as defined by Madhyamaka?
If not, how does the former serves as an analogy for the latter?
Here, the use of phenomena such as a mirror image as an analogy involves citing already established falsehood from everyday experience.
It is not the sense of falsehood as defined by Madhyamaka that the person has already established that is being cited as an analogy.
With a reflection perceived as a face, no differentiation whatsoever can be made on the level of appearance itself, saying, “This part of the reflection appears as the face and that part does not.”
It is the entirety of the reflection that appears as the face.
So citing this analogy of how, though the entirety of the perception of a face does not exist as it appears, there is no contradiction in maintaining that such a reflection arises in dependence upon its causes.
In the same way, when a blue appears as existing by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, no differentiation whatsoever can be made as to which part does and which part does not appear as existing through intrinsic characteristics.
Furthermore, what is perceived does not exist as perceived in its entirety.
Nonetheless, it can be established that there is no contradiction with the fact that the blue thing is produced from its own causes and that it can produce its own effects.
Now if one can maintain the standpoint whereby, while there is nothing in the mirror image that exists as a face as perceived, this does not lead to the mirror image becoming nonexistent, it would then become possible to uphold the standpoint whereby, although nothing within the entire field of perception of a blue object exists by virtue of intrinsic characteristic as it appears to, one can definitely still posit the existence of the blue object.
This kind of clear differentiation employing refined intellect as to how, in relation to form and so on, one distinguishes between the two — “This is to be negated” and “This is not to be negated” — on the basis of the analogy of a mirror image, is an indispensable aid to finding the Middle Way view.
So we should not be easily contented with our understanding of the role of such an analogy.
In view of these, the Commentary says: While understanding the fact of causes and effects even in relation to a mirror image that has no intrinsic existence, what learned person would, simply on the basis of perceiving form, feelings, and so on that are not outside the realm of causes and effects, determine these to be endowed with intrinsic nature?
Therefore, although learned ones perceive these as existing, they have no intrinsic arising.
Candrakīrti thus draws a distinction here between mere existence and intrinsic existence.
Furthermore, Candrakīrti demonstrated above that things do arise, and here he demonstrates that there is no intrinsic arising, so he makes a clear distinction between arising and intrinsic arising.
Without such distinctions, then existing things would exist in their own right, and things that do not exist in their own right would then become nonexistent.
In this way, one would fail to transcend the two extremes of reification and denigration.
In his Commentary on the Four Hundred Stanzas, for example, Candrakīrti says: Those who propound the existence of real entities consider things to be existent only so long as they are thought to possess essence.
The moment things are understood to lack an essence, they come to be for them utterly nonexistent.
For them such things then become as nonexistent as the horn of a donkey. They are thus compelled to speak in such dichotomous terms, so it is difficult for them to satisfy all their expectations.
Therefore, being free from all extremes of existence through understanding that nothing exists by virtue of its own essence and being free of all the extremes of nonexistence in that one can posit everything from cause and effect to the very facts of the world as possessing no intrinsic existence appears to be a distinctive interpretation of the noble Nāgārjuna’s thought by the master Buddhapālita and the revered Candrakīrti.
So distinguishing two types of existence and two types of nonexistence is crucially important.
That emptiness should be presented by the analogy of reflection is found in the following from the Meeting of Father and Son Sutra: Just as a reflection of a form with no intrinsic existence appears in a clear mirror, so understand phenomena such as trees.
That is, one should understand the other analogies of falsehood how these analogies and their referents are to be correlated along the same lines as this example of the mirror image.
The merits of negating intrinsic arising on both levels of the two truths
This has two parts: the merit of more readily avoiding the views of eternalism and nihilism and the merit of how cause and effect become most tenable.
Like reflections, all things are empty of intrinsic existence, and since no intrinsic nature exists equally in either of the two truths that of the ultimate and that of the conventional phenomena such as form do not intrinsically exist; they are neither eternal nor annihilated.
Annihilation here refers to the sense explained in the line So at the time of the sprout, there is no extinction of the seed.
In Fundamental Wisdom it says: As they assert what existed before is now no more, they fall therefore into annihilationism.
Nāgārjuna is stating here that if, having asserted intrinsic existence of things, one accepts that something that existed previously later becomes nonexistent or is impermanent in the sense of having disintegrated, this would constitute an annihilationist view.
For if one holds that things exist intrinsically, Nāgārjuna says, then whether one asserts a thing to be permanent or impermanent, this would constitute either an eternalist or a nihilist view.
At this point in the Commentary, Candrakīrti cites the passages from Fundamental Wisdom where Nāgārjuna states that the agent and the acts done are like when the Buddha manifests one emanation who in turn manifests another emanation.
Thus, Candrakīrti writes, Nāgārjuna has shown how things with no intrinsic existence do arise from no intrinsic existence.
Candrakīrti’s point is that when every function is posited in a context of no intrinsic existence, there is no danger of falling into nihilism.
In brief, if one fails to negate existence by virtue of intrinsic characteristic on the conventional level, one will fail to realize the extremely subtle level of selflessness.
It would also become difficult to ensure that the subtlest degrees of eternalist and nihilist views do not arise within one’s mind.
Therefore the benefit that comes from eliminating that object of negation on the conventional level is the relinquishing of all eternalist and nihilist views, with no residue.
If such an existence is negated on the conventional level, one will not only avoid falling into eternalist and nihilist views with respect to the ultimate truth, one will escape being soiled by the stains of eternalist and nihilist views with respect to conventional truth as well.
It thus has the merit of easily abandoning the views of eternalism and nihilism.
The merit of how cause and effect become most tenable.
This has three parts.
Someone who does not assert intrinsic existence need not accept foundation consciousness, illustrating by analogy how effects come into being from cessation of actions, and rejecting objections to this presentation.
Someone who does not assert intrinsic existence need not accept foundation consciousness.
The first has three parts.
Explaining the Commentary’s transitional passage, explaining the meaning of the words of the root text, and discussing related issues arising from this.
Explaining the Commentary’s transitional passage:
In this way, because things do not have intrinsic existence on the level of both truths, one casts views of eternalism and nihilism far away.
Not only that, it becomes tenable to maintain that karmic acts — even if committed long before — remain connected to their effects without conceiving such notions as foundation consciousness, mental continuum, noncorrosion, or obtainment.
Here Candrakīrti states that for the standpoint with no intrinsic existence, not only is there the merit of casting eternalist and nihilist views far away, there is also the merit of the complete tenability of connecting karma and its effects without having to resort to notions like the foundation consciousness and so on.
From the traditions of interpreting the treatises of the noble Nāgārjuna comes this unique interpretation, whereby one can still posit all effective transactions of the world even though not even the tiniest particle of intrinsic reality exists.
Based on this approach, many perfect tenets emerge that are unique compared to other commentators.
What are these tenets?
For now here are the principal ones: Rejecting a foundation consciousness that is separate from the sixfold classes of consciousness, a unique method of refuting reflexive awareness (self-cognition), rejecting the use of autonomous syllogism to engender of the view of suchness in others; thus three rejections, accepting external reality’s existence to the same extent as one accepts the existence of consciousness, accepting that even śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas realize the selflessness of phenomena, accepting that grasping at the self-existence of phenomena is a form of affliction.
Accepting that the disintegration of things is a conditioned thing.
Because of this reason, accepting a unique way of defining the three times.
Of these, the first is presented in the present section of the root text.
How rejecting reflexive awareness is related to nonacceptance of intrinsic existence will be explained later.
I have already explained extensively elsewhere how disavowing autonomous syllogism is related to the rejection of intrinsic existence, and a brief explanation will be presented here as well.
How acceptance of external reality also derives from such rejection will be explained later.
How the fifth tenet is due also to this rejection of intrinsic existence is as follows. Just as Buddhapālita defines the self-existence that is negated in the śrāvaka scriptures — such as in the statement “All phenomena are devoid of self-existence” — to be that of existence by virtue of an essence, this approach is accepted here as well.
The sense here is that of a comprehensive understanding of selflessness.
The meaning of a comprehensive understanding of the selflessness of persons is to be understood as the absence of a person existing by virtue of its own essence.
The point is that realizing such selflessness of persons correctly requires correctly realizing the selflessness of phenomena as well.
Given this, one must definitely admit grasping at the self-existence of phenomena to be a form of affliction.
This in turn gives rise to numerous distinctions between this system and that of Svātantrika Madhyamaka, such as two different ways of defining the afflictions, one subtler and the other coarser; two different opinions on the question of whether the path of the sixteen characteristics such as impermanence can itself lead to freedom; and different opinions on what specific stage of the path one begins to eliminate the obscurations to knowledge, and so forth.
Both Madhyamaka schools accept that there are some who, having entered the Mahayana path first, established well the view of suchness but later fell into the śrāvaka or pratyekabuddha path.
In that case, one must accept, he would gain insight into such truth through meditation on the selflessness of phenomena in a direct manner, and he will have gained deeper familiarity with what he has seen.
If so, one must also admit that through such a path, he will have eliminated, on the path of seeing, the acquired levels of grasping at self-existence of phenomena, and he will have eliminated, on the path of meditation, innate self-grasping.
This being so, the question becomes, within the standpoint of the Madhyamaka tradition that accepts things to exist through intrinsic characteristics, should one accept two types of grasping at the self-existence of phenomena — one that belongs to the class of afflictions and one that does not?
No clear statements on this point appear in the Indian sources themselves.
These Svātantrika Mādhyamikas do have to maintain that such śrāvakas or pratyekabuddhas may attain temporary elimination of the manifest levels of grasping at the self-existence of phenomena through their meditative cultivation of the path.
Nonetheless, without the complementary factor of the limitless collection of merit, it remains impossible to eliminate the seed of either of the two levels of grasping at the self-existence of phenomena.
So such Mādhyamikas would have to say that although some śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas may be able to temporarily eliminate the manifest levels of the obscuration to knowledge, the elimination of their seeds remain impossible.
In the view of our master Candrakīrti, in contrast, grasping at the self-existence of phenomena belongs to the class of afflictive obscurations, so to eliminate its seed does not require the complementary factor of the limitless collection of merit.
Such a complementary factor is only necessary, he maintains, to purify the habitual propensities toward delusory dualistic perceptions, which belong to the class of obscurations to knowledge.
Since gaining some understanding of these points just addressed seems to make a great deal of difference, I have discussed them here.
Explaining the meaning of the words of the root text.
What then is the account from the standpoint that asserts no intrinsic existence for how the connection between karma and its effects is maintained without accepting foundation consciousness or the like?
Now all Buddhist schools, both higher and lower, agree that even when a long period has elapsed between karma and its effects, from virtuous and nonvirtuous karma will emerge effects in the form of happiness and suffering.
This said, for the karmic act to remain present up to the point immediately before issuing its effect, it would have to be permanent.
Since something permanent cannot be causally efficient, the causal relation that allows effects to originate from such an act would become impossible.
If, on the other hand, the karmic act were to disintegrate in the subsequent moment — that is, in the moment immediately following the execution of the act — this would mean that from that point on up to the moment before the effect is issued, the karmic act would not be present.
And yet the disintegration of a karmic act cannot be a conditioned thing; so how then can effects arise from these karmic acts?
To respond to this problem of how the karmic act — which comes to cease in the second moment — deposits its potential immediately prior to ceasing, some postulate a foundation consciousness.
Others assert something called noncorrosion, resembling a guarantee or a promissory note in relation to a loan, that belongs to the category of nonassociated mental formations and is allegedly separate from either of the two karmic acts.
Some others postulate what is known as obtainment, something different in nature from the karmic act and belonging to the class of nonassociated mental formations.
Others postulate a mental continuum that has been imbued with the habitual propensities of the karmic acts.
Thus they all maintain that there is no contradiction for a karmic act that has ceased to bring forth its effects in the future long afterward.
Since the karmic act deposits its imprint upon foundation consciousness, such imprinted potential is the effect of the karmic act, and it is through the continuity of successive series of such an imprint that eventually effects come into being.
This is how, they say, effects of the initial karmic act come into being through a continuous series of effects.
We should understand the other three positions along these same lines as well.
Of these, the first is the standpoint of certain Cittamātras.
As for the second, Avalokitavrata attributes it to the Vaibhāṣika school; however, it is a school other than the Kashmiri Vaibhāṣika.
The third is also a subdivision of the Vaibhāṣika school.
As for the fourth, although no explicit identification of it is found, this position looks like the view of the Sautrāntika and Kashmiri Vaibhāṣika if one correlates it to the ninth chapter of Vasubandhu’s Commentary on the Treasury of Abhidharma.
However, although it is true that Kashmiri Vaibhāṣika accepts a notion of obtainment, they do not assert that obtainment is a product of the two karmic acts, the thing being obtained. Here appears to refer to someone who does accept this. This is the significance of the phrase in the Commentary “According to you . . .”
To proceed, the root text says: Since actions do not cease in an intrinsic manner, they remain potent even in the absence of a foundation consciousness. Indeed in some cases, the acts themselves may have long ceased, yet their effects will come about without fail; this you should know.
For the Prāsaṅgika Mādhyamika, according to whom the karmic act did not arise of its own being, since karmic actions do not cease in an intrinsic manner, there is no contradiction for an effect to originate from something that has not ceased intrinsically. So, even though one does not subscribe to a foundation consciousness, in its absence one can maintain that they, the karmic acts, remain potent in bringing forth their effects.
Indeed in some cases, the two karmic acts committed themselves may have long ceased in the mental continuum of the sentient being such that many eons have past, yet once committed, their effects will come about without fail.
This, that effects inviolably follow from their causes, is something you should know.
This being so, the causal connection between karma and its effects remains entirely tenable according to this standpoint.
The point of these lines is that each of the four positions responding to the above debate adhere to the view that a karmic act possesses arising and ceasing by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, and that it ceases in an intrinsic sense in the aftermath of the act itself.
Candrakīrti refutes these standpoints by stating that it is incorrect to respond by saying that although the karmic act ceases in an intrinsic sense, there is no problem because we accept foundation consciousness or the like.
And he refutes them with the argument “because there is no intrinsically established arising and ceasing of karmic acts.”
To demonstrate that this is the way in which Nāgārjuna would respond, Candrakīrti cites the following: Why has karma no arising?
Because it lacks intrinsic nature.
And since it is unarisen, it does not corrode. The meaning here is this: Because there is no intrinsically existing karmic act, there is no arising through its own being.
Therefore, since it is not possible for the karmic act to cease intrinsically, it is incorrect to hold that cessation of the karmic act following its commission to have intrinsic existence and then think of it as constituting noncorrosion.
Although this reasoning is presented in [Fundamental Wisdom] in the context of refuting noncorrosion, this can be applied equally to refute the other three positions as well, for the reasoning is exactly the same in all respects.
Furthermore, Candrakīrti cites the following from the sutra: Human lifespan is a hundred years; one might say humans live up to that; but there is no real piling up of years.
What is established too is like that.
Whether one speaks of no exhaustion or one speaks of the exhaustion of karma, in emptiness there is no exhaustion; exhaustion is taught in conventional terms. This is a scriptural source to demonstrate that there is no intrinsically existing exhaustion or cessation and that these two are posited from the standpoint of conventions.
In Naktso’s translation, we find the following rendering: Just as a heaping together of years does not exist, so should you view, ultimately, this collection as well.
These statements qualify what is being negated — namely, that things “do not cease by virtue of an intrinsic nature.”
Discussing related issues arising from this
This has two parts: () why the absence of intrinsic existence in something that has ceased is a reason to reject foundation consciousness and () how a basis for habitual propensities is posited despite the rejection of foundation consciousness.
Why the absence of intrinsic existence in something that has ceased is a reason to reject foundation consciousness There may be no intrinsic ceasing according to your own standpoint, but there are still statements like “Indeed in some cases, the acts themselves may have long ceased,” “actions ceased and lacking intrinsic existence,” and “exhaustion is taught in conventional terms.”
So you have to admit that following its execution, the karmic act has ceased to exist.
Since being ceased does not exist as conditioned thing and you do not accept foundation consciousness or the like as the ground for the relationship between a karmic act and its effects, then the objection still stands that it is untenable for effects to emerge when much time has elapsed following the cessation of the karmic act.
So your responses remain inadequate.
There is no such problem.
The very reason stated in the lines “Since actions do not cease in an intrinsic manner . . .”
establishes that from the disintegration of karmic acts, which consists in the fact of the karmic acts having ceased, the subsequent effects originate. Because of this, Candrakīrti did not present any specific separate solution.
The key point here is this: For all the standpoints asserting things to exist through their intrinsic nature, being disintegrated cannot be a conditioned thing.
For the Madhyamaka, however, which upholds no intrinsic existence, being disintegrated is established as a conditioned thing.
According to the first standpoint, when a conditioned thing such as a sprout has disintegrated, all conditioned factors that are part of the sprout have become undone, and no other entity — say, a vase — is obtained either [in the aftermath of disintegration].
They maintain, therefore, that this fact of being disintegrated is in no way a conditioned thing.
This is because no aspect of the specific conditioned thing can be identified with its disintegration, whether it is an individual sense base, such as blue color, or a composite thing like a vase, which is made up of its parts.
Therefore, in their mind, disintegration cannot be a conditioned thing.
According to the second standpoint, take for example Upagupta.
None of the five aggregates of Upagupta — whether individually, collectively, or of a different nature from these — can be said to constitute Upagupta, and neither can Upagupta himself be identified with any of these three.
Yet there is no contradiction in saying that what is imputed as Upagupta, on the basis of his aggregates, is a conditioned thing.
In the same manner, in the case of disintegration too, nothing within the conditioned thing that has disintegrated or any other conditioned thing that shares the same nature can be identified with it.
Yet, because disintegration occurs in dependence upon the conditioned thing that has disintegrated, it is a conditioned thing.
In Clear Words Candrakīrti presents both scriptural citations and reasoned arguments to prove this.
The first refers to the statement in the Ten Grounds Sutra that “Conditioned by birth, aging and death come about.” “
Death” refers to the disintegration of a sentient being, and this, the sutra states, is produced in dependence on birth.
The same sutra also says: Dying consists of two activities: it involves disintegration of karmic activity, and it brings forth the cause that ensures uninterrupted continuity of ignorance.
The sutra states that dying performs two functions: it makes death a caused event, and it perpetuates ignorance.
Disintegration is produced by a cause, and disintegration thereby also has the capacity to produce effects.
Although the disintegration referred to here is that of a continuum, the same is also true of momentary disintegration, where the first moment disintegrates at the time of the second moment.
So this [sutra citation] also indicates how the first moment is the cause of its own disintegration in the second moment.
Therefore, whether it is between a sentient being’s birth and death or between a momentary phenomenon’s not persisting at the time of its second moment and not having persisted at the time of its second moment, they are entirely equal in whether they can be considered conditioned things and whether they are produced by their causes.
In view of this, Fundamental Wisdom says: Things and nonthings are both conditioned phenomena.
And Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning states: The pacification derived from extinction of cause is understood to be exhaustion.
Thus, in the above, things such as sprouts as well as their nonexistence are both described as conditioned phenomena, and the extinction of the cause, like the exhaustion of oil in a lamp, is said to be the cause for the extinction of the effect, such as the lamp flame.
We must therefore accept this without doubt to be the intention of the noble Nāgārjuna.
Now, since the disintegration of the first moment at the time of the second moment is something that must be cognized by means of an explicit elimination of its object of negation, it is a form of negation; and, furthermore, since it is not a nonimplicative negation, it is an implicative negation.
This is because it has not simply eliminated a thing that has become disintegrated; it also implies, in the course of its negation, some other conditioned thing.
As for more details on the remaining parts of the reasoning proving disintegration to be a conditioned thing, you could learn these from my commentary on Fundamental Wisdom.
This reasoning on disintegration represents a form of reasoning that is most subtle and an important feature of Candrakīrti’s tradition.
How a basis for habitual propensities is posited despite the rejection of foundation consciousness One may not accept foundation consciousness, but one must nevertheless acknowledge that the propensities of virtuous and nonvirtuous karma can be imprinted and that, through maturation of these propensities, effects do come into being.
For in Commentary on Entering the Middle Way it says that “Beings cling to things as real owing to thorough maturation of the propensities toward real entities deposited through the beginningless cycle of existence.”
Many similar statements can be found as well.
Since habitual propensities will be untenable if there is no basis for depositing them, the question arises, “What is this basis?”
Just as those who assert foundation consciousness take such a consciousness — which they conceive to be the objective support for the afflicted mind generating the thought “I am” — to be the basis on which the propensities are imprinted, in the same manner, this tradition holds the very object of the innate mind that takes the form of the thought “I am” to be the basis on which the propensities are imbued.
In that case, one might ask, “What is the meaning of the statement in the Commentary on Entering the Middle Way that the mental continuum is the basis of habitual propensities?”
Since the mere “I” is a continuum imputed upon the mind or consciousness, it is referred to as the “mental continuum” as well.
And if we take the mind’s own successive states as being referred to as the continuum here, in the sense of the type continuity, this too constitutes an intermittent basis for imbuing the habitual propensities.
As for the nature of ignorance’s habitual propensities, Commentary on Entering the Middle Way says: That which percolates the mental continuum, imbues it, and makes it follow is a habitual propensity.
The “final base” of the afflictions, their “habit,” their “root,” and their “habitual propensities” — these are synonyms.
Even śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who have already eliminated the afflictions through their uncontaminated path do not eliminate them.
They are like, for example, when one has already removed the sesame oil or the fragrant flowers, one can still sense their subtle traces in the vase or the piece of cloth that came into contact with them.
One should extend this point about how there are these two types of bases to other habitual propensities as well, such as those of virtue and nonvirtue.
"In that case," one might wonder, “at the time of the uninterrupted phase of the path of seeing, although it is true that the object eliminated by the path of seeing is no more, the latent dispositions of the object eliminated by the path of meditation still persists.
Nonetheless, the mental consciousness in that phase remains uncontaminated, unsoiled by habitual propensities toward delusory dualistic perceptions.
Thus it would be incorrect to maintain that latent dispositions reside within such a mind.
Sensory consciousness cannot serve as the basis for these propensities, nor can the physical body be such a basis. Since you do not accept foundation consciousness, there is then no basis for these dispositions.”
Reply: There is no such problem. At that time, the mere “I” serves as the basis for the latent dispositions of the factors to be eliminated by the path of meditation.
One should extend this understanding to other objects of elimination and their corresponding antidotes as well.
If one understands the unique way this system [of Candrakīrti] defines the nature of person, arguments such as the following pose no problems.
These include “When uncontaminated states of mind manifest in the mental continua of āryas born in the first three formless states — infinite space, infinite consciousness, and nothingness — their very status as persons would come to an end because no mundane levels of mind are present.” “
Similarly,” one might object, “when within the mental continuum of an ārya born in the [highest] formless state peak of existence arise uncontaminated states of mind belonging to the [second-highest] formless state nonthingness, the beings of both peak of existence as well as nothingness would come to cease.
Their uncontaminated mind cannot serve as the basis for the identities of the two beings as well as serve as the basis for the identity of the person who has attained nirvana.”
The reason [such arguments pose no threat to Candrakīrti’s view] is because, according to Candrakīrti, one can legitimately define a person even without positing either of the two — contaminated or uncontaminated mind — to constitute the person’s identity.
The opponent’s standpoint, on the other hand, assumes that the nature of the person, those who have not yet entered a path and those on the learner’s stage [i.e., the first four of the five paths], belongs to the class of phenomena that is neutral and nondefiling.
As for the responses offered above, how can someone like me speak independently on matters related to these great systems of thought?
I have spoken on these issues, however, on the basis of the traditions of the great charioteers who knew how to present the thought of the savior Nāgārjuna exactly as it is and in its entirety.
Judging from these responses, it appears that the remaining arguments aiming to prove the existence of foundation consciousness would also pose no problem to this system of Candrakīrti.
Anyway, those whose intelligence is great, refined, and sharp should inquire further.
Illustrating by analogy how effects come into being from the cessation of actions To illustrate the point above about how effects originate from disintegrated actions, it reads: Having experienced certain things in a dream, a fool may continue to lust for them even when awake.
Likewise, even from actions ceased and lacking intrinsic existence, effects will come to be. Having perceived certain things such as beautiful women in a dream, a fool may continue to lust for them, things now ceased, even when he is awake — that is, even after having woken up.
Likewise, even from karmic actions ceased and also lacking intrinsic existence, effects will come to be.
This illustrates how effects can arise from karma following its disintegration.
To substantiate the point of this analogy, Candrakīrti cites the Transferring to Another Existence Sutra: “O great king, it is thus. A man experiences a dream wherein he is making love to a beautiful woman.
Were he to continue to think of that beautiful woman after waking from that dream, O great king, what would you think of this?
Is this person who, having dreamed of making love to a beautiful woman, continues to think of that beautiful woman even after waking from sleep someone who has the character of a learned one?”
"Blessed One," replied the king, “this is not so.
O Blessed One, if the beautiful woman of his dream does not exist, and if she cannot be observed, what possibility is there to experience her?
Such a man will be someone who is depraved and desperate. ”
Up to this, the sutra presents the analogy.
The following presents how the analogy should be applied to its referent: O great king, likewise, childish beings on the ordinary stage who are not endowed with learning, having seen forms with their eyes, manifestly cling to forms that inspire pleasure in their mind.
And having clung to them, they engender attachment toward them.
Being attached, they engage in acts with their body, speech, and mind stemming from attachment, from aversion, and from delusion.
Having executed the karmic acts, the acts come to cease.
When these karmic acts have ceased, they do not reside in the east with a support.
They do not reside in the intermediate directions.
"Not endowed with learning" here refers to not having the realization of suchness on the basis of having heard the teaching on suchness; "manifest clinging" is clinging to self-existence.
As for the three karmic acts stemming from attachment, these include both virtuous and nonvirtuous karmic acts.
Karmic acts stemming from aversion are nonvirtuous, while karmic acts stemming from delusion can accumulate both karma.
The statement that karmic acts cease immediately after their execution is on the conventional level, while the remainder of the sutra citation rejects such cessation to exist by virtue of an essence.
Next the sutra says: Then, at another time, when the person nears the time of death, and as the lifespan propelled by a karma that is commensurate with it becomes exhausted and the last moment of consciousness ceases, then like the mind of a person waking up from sleep turning to the beautiful woman he dreamed of, the person's mind will turn toward that karma.
Having exhausted a karma that is commensurate — namely, the karma that helps sustain the continuity in this life of the aggregates of the same kind — and when the last moment of consciousness of this present life comes to cease, then like the lustful man who, after waking, instantly thinks of the beautiful woman of his dream and turns his attention to her, the dying person's mind at the point of death turns toward the karma whose potency has been reactivated and is therefore likely to mature in the next life.
This, however, is not an instance of remembering.
Candrakīrti then goes on to cite the following:
In this way, as the last moment of consciousness ceases and the first moment of consciousness that is part of the next birth arises — and if one is going to be reborn among the celestial beings . . .
Alternatively, if one is going to be reborn among the hungry ghosts.
The cessation of the last moment of consciousness refers to that of this life.
The emergence of the first moment of consciousness that is part of the next birth is indicated with the phrase “among the celestial beings” and so on.
Since the intermediate state does not represent any of the six realms of existence, consciousness referred to here is that of the new birth.
Although an intermediate state exists between death and the next birth, often do not mention it when speaking of karma and its effects.
This is because the primary aim is to establish the causal connection between karma and its effects from the perspective of birth and death.
Candrakīrti then cites the following from the same sutra:
The instant the first moment of consciousness ceases, the continuity of the mind will emerge commensurate with the fruitional effect that one will come to experience.
O great king, no phenomenon whatsoever is transferred from this world to the next; yet there is the transition of death and what manifests as a rebirth.
O great king, here the cessation of the final moment of consciousness is what is called the transition of death; and the emergence of the first moment of consciousness is what is called birth.
O great king, when the final moment of consciousness ceases, it does not go anywhere.
When the consciousness that is part of the rebirth emerges, it does not come from anywhere.
Why is this so?
It is because they lack intrinsic existence.
O great king, the final moment of consciousness is empty of the final moment of consciousness.
Death and transmigration are empty of death and transmigration; karma is empty of karma; the first moment of consciousness is empty of the first moment of consciousness.
Birth is empty of birth, yet one observes that karmic acts do not corrode.
So, the sutra states, prior to connecting with existence via rebirth, one experiences happiness or suffering as a result of past karma.
From the continuity of that consciousness that experiences these, birth emerges in the form of the first moment of the consciousness of rebirth.
The sutra also states how the two — the transition of death and birth — exist on the conventional level and not on the ultimate level.
And the reason stated for this is “because they lack intrinsic existence,” where what is being negated is qualified, a qualification that must be applied to the statements about how consciousness and so forth are empty of themselves.
Now when such statements are made, given that there is the risk that people might consider karma and its effects to be nonexistent, the sutra states that karmic acts do not corrode.
Rejecting objections to this presentation
This has two parts: rejecting the objection that karmic acts will give forth infinite fruitional effects and rejecting the objection that we are contradicting with scriptures that present a foundation consciousness.
Know likewise that ripened acts do not bear fruit again. [ Question:]
You assert that fruitional effects emerge from karmic acts, which have no intrinsic exhaustion because they are not born by means of an intrinsic nature.
If so, then fruitional effects should similarly emerge from those [karmic acts] for which fruitional effects have already ripened. There will therefore be the fault of endless process.
Reply: While nonexistent objects are equal in their unreality, those with eye disease, for example, perceive with their eyes nonexistent forms such as floating hairs and do not see the forms of just any nonexistent thing, such as the horns of a donkey or the son of a barren woman.
Know likewise that, while they are equal in having no existence through intrinsic nature, fruition takes place from [karmic acts] that have not yet ripened and that already ripened acts do not bear fruit again.
To indicate that this analogy establishes not only that effects certainly emerge from karmic acts but also that virtuous and nonvirtuous acts are individually correlated to desirable or undesirable effects, the root text reads:
As such, unwholesome effects come from dark acts, while wholesome effects are seen to come from virtuous acts, and the wise, for whom there is no virtuous or nonvirtuous, become free. Thus speculation on karma and effects has been discouraged.
There is a reason those with eye disease see floating hairs and not donkey horns.
As such, wholesome fruitional effects do not emerge from nonvirtuous karma, and undesirable fruitional effects do not emerge from virtuous karma.
One can see that it is from dark karmic acts that unwholesome or undesirable fruitional effects come, and it is from virtuous acts that wholesome or desirable fruitional effects come.
As for the wise, for whom there is no virtuous or nonvirtuous karma — that is, those who realize [karma and its effects] cannot be objectified in term of intrinsic existence — they become free from the cycle of existence.
Therefore, thinking that ordinary people — those who strive to determine through evidential reasoning why this or that specific feature of the effect emerges from such and such specific karma — may come to denigrate karma and its effects, thus destroying conventional truth, the Conqueror stated that the fruitional effects of karma remain inconceivable.
Thus speculation on, or analysis of, karma and effects has been discouraged by the Buddha.
Fearing the danger of losing conviction in the law of karma, this treatise strives to engender conviction in karma through numerous avenues such as those presented above.
This point needs to be appreciated. We should make our view of emptiness a complementary factor that strengthens this conviction [in the law of karma], and on that basis, we should strive to ensure that this one time we do not return empty-handed from our visit to the island of precious gems.
This has three parts: the actual meaning of the words that eliminate contradiction with the scriptures, the question of whether a foundation consciousness separate from mental consciousness has been taught [in the scriptures], and examples of scriptures that were taught with specific intentions.
The actual meaning of the words that eliminate contradiction with the scriptures.
If one can posit a causal relation between karma and its effects without foundation consciousness, does that mean what has been stated in the Descent into Laṅkā “and so on,” which refers to the Unraveling the Intent Sutra as well as in the Mahayana Abhidharma Sutra — namely, “foundation consciousness” characterized as the repository for the potentials of all entities, as containing all the seeds, and as the cause of all outer and inner entities, which emerge like waves from the ocean — should not be presented at all as something taught in the scriptures?
This is not the case.
For the benefit of those who can be tamed through teaching the existence of foundation consciousness, it was indeed taught to exist.
This response indicates how the existence of foundation consciousness was accepted for a specific purpose from the perspective of trainees.
Thus, according to Madhyamaka’s own standpoint, when such a statement is being shown to be a teaching with specific intent, it is done like this: the basis of the intention — what is in fact intended — is emptiness in the sense of a lack of intrinsic existence, and it is referred to here by the term foundation consciousness (ālayavijñāna); the reason emptiness is being called the foundation of all (ālaya) is because this nature pervades all entities.
Furthermore, not only did the Buddha teach foundation consciousness for a specific purpose, he taught the substantial reality of persons as well.
This is because by teaching that persons possess substantial reality, the Buddha can sustain those individuals who can be tamed through such a teaching.
This refers to, for example, the statement, “O monks, the five aggregates are the burden; that which carries this burden is the person. ”
Here, in response to questions from those who conceive the person to be substantially real, instead of teaching that this does not exist, the Buddha taught that the person who is the carrier of the burden does exist.
Although the word “substantial” is not explicit, the reference is to a substantially real person.
Again for the benefit of some other trainees, the Buddha taught mere aggregates with no substantially real person, such as in the following: Whether one calls it “mind,” “mental faculty,” or “consciousness,” it is this that is thoroughly imbued over a long period of time with faith, moral discipline, and so on, and when it advances further, one will go to the higher realms in the next life.
Thus, for the benefit of those who, because of grasping at the true existence of the way to the higher realms and to the freedom of enlightenment, wonder what degree of reality they should accept, the Buddha taught that aggregates alone exist, without refuting the object of their clinging to true existence.
All of these were taught by the Buddha due to specific underlying intentions.
"For what kind of trainees, then, did the Buddha teach foundation consciousness?"
one might ask.
In response, the root text reads: “Foundation consciousness exists,” “Persons exist,”
“These aggregates alone exist”: such teachings were given for those who cannot understand the most profound truth.
In regard to teachings such as “Foundation consciousness exists,” “Persons exist” as a substantial reality, and “These aggregates alone exist” in that they possess true existence, such teachings were, as explained above, given for the sake of those trainees who, for the time being, cannot understand or realize the meaning of the most profound truth.
Some trainees have been habituated to extreme views over long periods and remain incapable of engaging the profound reality.
For example, the Precious Garland says:
“I do not exist!” “
I will not be!” “ Mine do not exist!” “
They will not be!”
Thus the childish come to be terrified.
So when the ultimate nature is first taught, some may become terrified and regard the Buddha’s teaching as akin to an abyss.
In doing so, they will turn away from the teaching and will not enter it; the teaching will then serve no great purpose.
On the other hand, by not teaching the profound final truth right at the beginning but teaching foundation consciousness, true existence of the aggregates, and so forth, the teaching instead cleanses trainees of their heterodox standpoints and leads them toward greater objectives.
In the future, they will come to comprehend the meaning of the scriptures excellently and will relinquish their belief in the existence of foundation consciousness and the like.
Therefore there can be only merit for teaching such things, and for the Buddha to teach these is not a fault.
Understanding this to be the proper sequence of teaching, Four Hundred Stanzas says: In whatever teaching one delights in, one should partake in this first.
He who might come to be damaged is in no way a vessel of that teaching.
Now, those who need to be taught that there is a foundation consciousness that is separate from the sixfold collection of consciousness must also be taught to reject external reality.
They are therefore suitable vessels for teaching suchness only in terms of the emptiness of a substantial subject-object duality.
Since they do not know how to posit a causal relation between karma and its effects without embracing a consciousness characterized in the above terms, they are referred to as “those who cannot understand the most profound truth”.
The question of whether a foundation consciousness separate from mental consciousness has been taught
Many scriptures, such as the Hundred Thousand Lines on the Perfection of Wisdom, mention a sixfold collection of consciousness when listing classes of consciousness; thus many sutras do not speak of more than this sixfold collection.
So there are two categories of scriptures — those that posit foundation consciousness and those that do not.
In the same vein, when the revered Maitreya expounds the meaning of these scriptures in his Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes, Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras, and Differentiation of Phenomena and Their Ultimate Nature, he presents the standpoint that accepts foundation consciousness and the absence of external reality.
In contrast, in his Ornament of Realizations and Sublime Continuum, Maitreya presents the standpoint that does not posit foundation consciousness and does not reject external reality.
The great master Asaṅga too did not interpret the intention of the Sublime Continuum from the Cittamātra standpoint at all; rather, he expounded the text from the Madhyamaka perspective.
Furthermore, in his commentary on the Sublime Continuum, Asaṅga explains in the following manner the very scriptural proof cited from the Abhidharma in his Summary of the Great Vehicle to establish the existence of foundation consciousness: The Buddha said that although the Tathāgata element that constitutes an essence is present in sentient beings, they do not recognize it.
For example, it says in the sutra: This element since beginningless time is the locus of all phenomena; due to its presence, all migrations as well as nirvana are attained.
This verse is cited as a scriptural authority to establish the presence in all sentient beings of the ultimate reality that is buddha nature.
Such an approach accords with our master Candrakīrti, who explains emptiness to be the underlying intended meaning of the teaching of foundation consciousness.
So Asaṅga too understands that a foundation consciousness separate from the sixfold collection of consciousness is something taught by the Buddha for the sake of certain trainees and for a specific purpose.
Question: “In that case,” one might ask, “how does one interpret the following in Commentary on the Awakening Mind, where it says that foundation consciousness sustains existence?”
When close to a lodestone, an iron object swiftly moves forward; it possesses no mind of its own yet appears as if it does.
Likewise foundation consciousness too appears to be real though it is false; it moves to and fro in this way and sustains [the three realms of] existence.
Just as the ocean and the trees move about though they possess no mind, likewise foundational consciousness moves about in dependence upon the body.
Reply: It is shown [earlier in Commentary on the Awakening Mind] how the teaching of mind only — according to which, following the rejection of an external reality independent from the mind, the mind alone is left, without negating its intrinsic existence — was taught to help the childish overcome their terror toward the teaching that everything is empty, and therefore it does not constitute the definitive truth.
Furthermore, the text refutes the Yogācāra view that a pure state of mind possessing intrinsic existence and attained through the transformation of the base exists as the sphere of experience of the reflexive gnosis [of āryas].
When this is refuted, there remains the salient question, “If the mind has no true existence, how can processes such as a sentient being entering this world from the previous one and departing to the next one from this present world function?”
In response to such a qualm, the text states how the iron object and tree do not have minds of their own and yet they move about as if they do.
In the same manner, the text says, foundation consciousness has no true existence and yet it is perceived with activities like leaving and entering as if it does possess true existence.
So this text does not indicate that the author accepts intrinsically real foundation consciousness, as described in other treatises.
One might think, “Although this text might not accept a foundation consciousness that exists by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, it does accept an illusion-like consciousness that is separate from the six classes of consciousness — a form of consciousness endowed with all the seeds of afflicted phenomena and all those of the enlightened class of phenomena.”
Reply: Were the text to accept this kind of foundation consciousness, it would also have to reject external reality, since forms, sounds, and so on are claimed to appear merely from the maturing of propensities contained in foundation consciousness.
In that case, how would one understand the following from the same text?
The cognizer perceives the cognizable; without the cognizable there is no cognition.
Therefore why do you not admit that neither object nor subject exists [at all]?
This says that, insofar as their existence or nonexistence is concerned, both the outer object of knowledge and the inner cognition are equal. If one does not exist, neither will the other, the text states.
This standpoint is no different from the statement here in our work [Entering the Middle Way], where Candrakīrti says that objects and their cognitions are exactly equal with respect to their existence or lack thereof.
As such, it is wrong to discriminate between the two in terms of their existence or nonexistence on the level of either of the two truths.
Therefore the existence of a consciousness with no parallel external reality is not a position of the master Nāgārjuna.
Since there is no foundation consciousness separate from mental consciousness according to Nāgārjuna, what is called “foundation” refers, in general, to the mind characterized by mere awareness and luminosity and, more specifically, to mental consciousness.
The reasons are that the context here is a response that demonstrates that causal efficacy remains tenable despite the mind’s general lack of intrinsic existence, that it is mental consciousness that assumes birth in cyclic existence, and that it is mental consciousness that is the basis of all classes of phenomena, both afflicted and enlightened.
The literal truth of foundation consciousness is rejected in Essence of the Middle Way too.
Similarly, given that he accepts external reality, the master Jñānagarbha does not accept foundation consciousness.
There also seems to be two camps within the Cittamātra, which rejects external reality — one that asserts foundation consciousness and another that does not.
Even the master Kamalaśīla, who does not accept external reality, writes, “Mental consciousness alone is endowed with the potency to connect with another life.”
He then goes on to cite the following from Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Abhidharma: Severing, reconnecting, being freed from attachment, degenerating, transitioning through death, being born — these we maintain to be mental consciousness alone.
It is clear from the above that the great master Śāntarakṣita also does not accept foundation consciousness.
The same is true also of master Abhayākaragupta.
Other Mahayana scriptures too do mention the term foundation consciousness, but they do not specify clearly what the term actually refers to.
However, if one examines their meaning, there is never any apparent acceptance of something distinct from the six classes of consciousness.
So, to conclude, this tradition appears, in fact, to belong to the standpoint that accepts external reality; and it is mental consciousness that is being designated by the term foundation consciousness.
These issues require extensive treatment, but fearing excessive length, I will not write about them more here.
Examples of scriptures taught with specific intentions Even though the Buddha was free of identity view, he did speak in terms of “I” and “mine.”
It is not only foundation consciousness that has been taught to help trainees initially engage with the teaching.
For example, even though the Buddha, being free of identity view and its habitual imprints, totally eliminated all conceptualizations grasping in terms of “I” and “mine,” he did still speak in terms of “I” and “mine.”
This is a skillful means to help the world comprehend the truth of his teachings.
Likewise, though things are devoid of intrinsic existence, the Buddha spoke, in a provisional sense alone, of their existence as though they possessed intrinsic nature.
This is a skillful means to help the world to gradually comprehend suchness.
In brief, the meaning is this: It appears as though the Buddha possesses conceptions of I and mine as judged by his utterance of “I” and “mine,” yet the Buddha’s lack of conceptualization remains the definitive truth.
In the same way, when the Buddha taught as though phenomena possess intrinsic existence, this appears to reflect his intention. Nonetheless, the definitive truth remains that phenomena do not exist in such terms.
The way the Buddha engaged with conventional truths in consonance with the world is as extensively presented in the following stanzas from a sutra belonging to the Pūrvaśaila sect: If the saviors of the world do not engage in accord with the world, no one will know the nature of the Buddha and what is buddhahood.
Maintaining that aggregates, elements, and sense bases are one in their natures, yet he speaks of the world of three realms.
This is to accord with the world.
The realities that have no name are inconceivable, yet through names he speaks of these to sentient beings.
This is to accord with the world.
Revealing clearly the absence of entity and abiding in the buddha’s nature, “There is no absence of entity at all,” he teaches.
This is to accord with the world.
Not seeing truth or the absence of truth, yet he speaks of cessation and sublime truth; he utters such excellent speech.
This is to accord with the world.
There is no disintegration or birth, and though things are equal within the ultimate expanse, he speaks of the eon-ending conflagration.
This is to accord with the world.
Whether past, present, or future, the nature of sentient beings cannot be observed, yet he speaks of sentient beings’ natures.
This is to accord with the world.
Of these, the last stanza presents the selflessness of persons in terms of sentient beings lacking intrinsic existence, while the remaining stanzas present, by reference to “entity” and “absence of entity,” the selflessness of phenomena.
In the Blaze of Reasoning, the Pūrvaśaila sect is described as having emerged as a branching off from the Mahāsāṃgika.
Thus it appears that at least one sutra in the śrāvaka scriptural collection clearly teaches phenomena to be devoid of intrinsic existence.
Refuting the Cittamātra Standpoint
Refuting, in particular, the Cittamātra standpoint This has three parts: refuting intrinsic existence of consciousness with no external reality, refuting the proof for intrinsic existence of dependent nature, and how the word “only” in the statement about mind only does not reject external reality.
Refuting intrinsic existence of consciousness with no external reality
This has two parts: presenting the opponent’s standpoint and refuting that standpoint.
Presenting the opponent’s standpoint
The proponents of consciousness, who are unable to bear the Madhyamaka standpoint presented thus far, go about establishing the meaning of the scriptures by propounding a standpoint that does not reflect the Buddha’s intention but is instead created out of their own preconceptions.
To state this standpoint clearly as outlined in their own texts, first the opponent’s position is presented.
This is how Cittamātra interprets.
This bodhisattva also realizes that mind and mental factors, given there is no external reality, are mere dependently originated entities with no correspondence to an external reality.
This is therefore referred to as “realizing suchness in terms of mere consciousness.”
When asked, “How does such a bodhisattva realize suchness?” they respond as follows.
This bodhisattva has established, through reasoning to be presented below, that phenomena such as forms emerge from the maturation of inner habitual propensities. He is apprehending no objects separate from the mind, and without them he perceives no apprehending subject separate from such objects.
Thus thoroughly understanding the triple world to be mere consciousness, he cultivates familiarity with this suchness of nonduality, and through such familiarity, he sees this suchness of nonduality directly with his own reflexive awareness.
Having pursued such gradual familiarization in the past, the bodhisattva on the sixth level realizes suchness in terms of consciousness only.
If asked, “If all this is consciousness only and there is no external reality, how does mere mind possessing the aspect of such external reality come to arise?”
Just as in the ocean whipped by windstorm,
waves rise high one after another, so from the seed of all, foundation consciousness, mere consciousness arises through its own potential.
Just as in the great ocean, source of waves, for example, when it is whipped and beaten hard by windstorm, what previously seemed calm as if sleeping gives way to waves that rise high one after another, as if competing with each other.
So like that, this imperfect dependent world that is mere consciousness arises from foundation consciousness, the seed of all outer and inner phenomena, through the maturing of its potentials commensurate with their own class. These potentials were deposited upon foundation consciousness through the ceasing of afflictions such as attachment and virtues such as faith.
The childish conceive the world in dualistic terms of subject and object, dividing it into the inner and the outer. Yet no object exists, not even the slightest, that is substantially separate from consciousness.
This above statement indicates that in much the same manner as those who assert God and so on to be the creator of the world of beings, the proponents of foundation consciousness speak of it as the bearer of all the seeds, since it is the basis of all the entities that are perceived as objects of consciousness.
For example, one reads: A spider is the cause of a spider web, water stone that of water, and just as the tree trunk is the cause of its branches, it is the cause of all beings.
The difference is that while God is eternal, foundation consciousness is impermanent.
It is through teaching foundation consciousness, therefore, that the Buddha tames many who have been habituated to heterodox views over many lifetimes.
When presenting the view of the Cittamātra, the Commentary often speaks of there being “no external reality.”
It also says things like “Objects separate from consciousness do not exist in the slightest,” which qualifies the nonexistence of objects such as form in terms of “separate from consciousness . . .”
And on the line “is what is conceived as the physical eye organ” (.d), Candrakīrti writes in the commentary, “There is no eye organ that is separate from consciousness.”
So in relation to Cittamātra, should one qualify what is being negated in the context of the rejection of external reality in the above terms, or should one accept, without any qualification, that the five sense objects such as visible form and the five sense organs do not exist at all?
Yes, in the Commentary both instances are found — namely, with the qualification applied and without it.
That said, just as repeated instances of qualification in the context of negating arising must be extended to all instances where it is not found, the same must be done here as well.
For example, Summary of the Great Vehicle, an authoritative text representing the opponent’s standpoint, says: Why is it called the appropriating consciousness?
Because it is the cause of all physical sense organs, and it is the basis upon which all physical bodies are appropriated.
Therefore, so long as one’s lifespan endures, it sustains the five physical sense organs without disintegration.
And: The “common ones” are all the seeds of the container world; the “uncommon ones” are all the seeds of an individual being’s sense bases.
The common ones are seeds from which insentient things emerge.
Thus the seeds for the container world residing in the foundation consciousness are described as the seeds of all the entities that are insentient; and the same statement is found in the Summary as well.
In Commentary on the Dependent Origination Sutra also, it says that name-and-form come into being through being conditioned by foundation consciousness, where it identifies name as the remaining four aggregates and form as material forms composed of elements and their derivatives.
Further, it speaks of how such a form does not exist in the formless realm but does exist in the other two realms. Thus there appear to be many instances where the Cittamātra school does seem to accept material form.
If this is not the case, then when it comes to all the contexts where one speaks in terms of form, sound, and so on — which are defined on the basis of the form aggregate — it would not be viable for the Cittamātra to engage in everyday transactions using such conventions, unless some entirely new system of convention were created.
As far as I can tell, there is no one among the Buddhists of the noble land of India who, despite seeing that conventions such as form, sound, and so on cannot be maintained within their system, still maintains that theirs is an excellent standpoint.
As for the meaning of the phrase “those who propound objects of knowledge to be internal,” “objects of knowledge” refers to form, sound, and so on, and these are not asserted to be external but are propounded to be inner realities.
Now if the Cittamātra school accepts form, sound, and so on, then their rejection of external reality will amount to a merely semantic point.
For it is those very things like form and the rest that are perceived as external that others posit to constitute external reality.
This would be like saying to the Madhyamaka that its argument rejecting the intrinsic existence of form and so on yet maintaining their existence is raising a merely semantic point, because they still acknowledge the existence of form and so on whose very intrinsic existence they deny.
In any case, this touches upon a point that seems to be most difficult for both schools.
Not only is it a challenge for the Madhyamaka standpoint to posit form and so on in the aftermath of negating their intrinsic existence, there is the similar challenge for the Cittamātra too.
For if external reality is negated, form and so on become nonexistent, and if form and so on are posited, then external reality may need to be admitted as well.
These are certainly thorny questions, but fearing length, I have not written more about these matters here.
To continue, the root text reads: “Therefore dependent nature, which is the cause of imputed things, has intrinsic existence: it emerges in the absence of external objects, it actually exists, and it is beyond the realm of concepts.”
Given that the settled meaning of the scriptures is known to be as we have explained above, one should accept without hesitation, therefore, that dependent nature has intrinsic existence.
This is because we maintain it to be the cause of the entire network of conceptualization, such as the apprehension of the things of the subject-and-object world as imputed — as existing as substantially distinct from each other.
Now the illusion of a snake that is based on seeing a coiled rope does not arise where no rope is present, and similarly the false perception of objects such as a vase does not occur just in the sky, without some physical locus.
In the same manner, there is the question of what is the basis or the cause of the illusion that conceives things such as a blue patch as external since there is no external reality?
Therefore, one must accept without doubt the existence of an imperfect dependent nature that is perceived in dualistic terms of substantially distinct subject and object, which is the cause for the illusion of external reality.
And this basis of perception namely, dependent nature constitutes the cause of both the bondage to afflicted existence and the freedom of enlightenment.
In either of the two systems, whether Madhyamaka or Cittamātra, if there is a presentation of emptiness whereby the very thing that constitutes the basis of clinging — the thing that ordinary sentient beings perceive and grasp as truly existing in the manner they perceive it to — is shown to be empty of that mode of existence, then the realization of such an emptiness constitutes the path [to liberation].
If one does not take the negation of that conceived object of ordinary sentient beings’ clinging to true existence to be the realization of emptiness but establishes some extraneous emptiness to be the truth instead, this will not be an antidote to any levels of the clinging to true existence, coarse or subtle, that has been ingrained in us since beginningless time.
One’s efforts will then be fruitless.
Understood thus, one will come to recognize correctly that, just as the dependent nature that appears in dualistic terms is perceived in the dichotomous terms of substantially distinct subjects and objects, the absence of such an imputed nature that one grasps to be real constitutes the emptiness of that object of negation.
And what is left behind — the basis of emptiness and the emptiness itself — possesses true existence according to this [Cittamātra] system.
Knowing this perfectly, one will comprehend excellently the meaning of emptiness as well.
The opponent’s thesis presented here is the standpoint encapsulated in the phrase “the absence of this in that . . .”
found in Bodhisattva Grounds as well as in Commentary on the Differentiation of the Middle and Extremes, the meaning of which is as explained above.
The Commentary on Sublime Continuum, however, contains an explanation of a similar phrase “that which is absent in that . . .”
This latter case presents a way of explaining the phrase according to the Madhyamaka standpoint that is totally different from the first two texts. Again, fearing excessive length, I have not written about this point here.
This dependent nature emerges from its own habitual propensities alone in the absence of external objects; it actually exists intrinsically; and it exists as something that is, as understood in this [Cittamātra] system, ultimately beyond the realm of concepts — namely, of language and thought.
Cittamātra consider the linguistic terms associated with the outer and the inner to represent the unanalyzed perspective.
In brief, the dependent nature has three characteristics: it comes into being in the absence of external reality, it exists intrinsically, and it is not an object of conceptual elaborations in the ultimate sense as understood in this tradition.
Since being “the cause of the imputed nature of things” is included within the characteristic of “being an intrinsically real entity,” it is not a separate attribute from the three.
The statement that “the dependent nature exists” does not refer to its mere existence; it refers to a special kind of existence.
The master Sthiramati says this in the following: When the text states, “The conceptualization of that which is not the real exists,” the word “intrinsically” is implied.
Recognizing this qualification becomes critical later on.
Refuting that standpoint
This has two parts: the extensive refutation and a summary that concludes the refutation.
The extensive refutation
The first has three parts: refuting the analogy for the intrinsic existence of consciousness and the absence of external reality, refuting the arising of consciousness devoid of external reality through the potency of propensities, and how such refutation is not inconsistent with meditation on foulness.
Refuting the analogy for the intrinsic existence of consciousness and the absence of external reality
This has two parts: refuting the dream analogy and refuting the analogy of seeing floating hairs.
Refuting the dream analogy
The first has three parts: how the dream analogy does not establish intrinsic existence of consciousness, how the dream analogy does not establish nonexistence of external reality, and how the dream analogy establishes all entities to be false.
How the dream analogy does not establish intrinsic existence of consciousness
Where is your analogy for this mind with no external reality?
If you say, “Like a dream, for example,” let’s examine this. Since such a mind does not exist for me even in a dream, this analogy of yours has no validity.
If you, Cittamātra, assert that there is no external reality but there is a mind that exists through its intrinsic characteristic, where is your analogy for this — something you could cite and say, “for example”?
To this Cittamātra responds: “Say one is sleeping inside a tiny room and, due to illusion caused by sleep, one dreams of an entire herd of mad elephants.
Could those elephants be inside that room? They could not.
Like this dream, I accept with certainty that while there are no external objects, an intrinsically real consciousness does exist.
To demonstrate that such a response is pointless, Candrakīrti says: “Let’s examine — that is to say, analyze — this example here.”
What is it that needs to be analyzed?
It is this: Just as elephants in a dream have no existence, this mind that dreams of a herd of mad elephants, a mind that [supposedly] exists by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, has no existence for us either.
This is because it is unborn.
And if there is no consciousness that exists by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic, then this analogy of yours has no validity, for it would not be established for both parties.
Therefore there can be no consciousness without external reality.
What is not being demonstrated here is that, just as elephants in a dream do not exist, neither does consciousness. One must understand that this statement indicates the nonexistence of intrinsically real consciousness.
For the dependent nature devoid of external reality asserted by Cittamātra is said to possess intrinsic reality.
In the Commentary too, when commenting on the concluding summary “Just as there is no cognizable object, understand that there is no cognizing mind either” (.cd), one finds the following explicit qualification: “Know that the cognizing mind that takes on the aspects of the objects of knowledge too is unborn by virtue of its own essence. ”
Furthermore, both the root text and its relevant commentary contain numerous instances where, when refuting concepts such as this, the object of negation is qualified.
Moreover, what Candrakīrti states in the following line about how ignorance gives rise to volition and how volition gives rise to consciousness has to be from the perspective of his own standpoint: Why then would the Great One proclaim in the same sutra that the mind was born from delusion and karma?
In light of this statement, how could any thinking person attribute to Candrakīrti the view that consciousness has no existence?
Therefore, with respect to all such instances where parity is being drawn between the cognizer and cognized insofar as their existence or nonexistence is concerned, we should understand these to be from the perspective where what is being negated is qualified.
Now, the opponent might entertain the thought “If no deluded consciousness exists in dreams, it would be impossible to recall the dream experiences after waking up.”
This kind of objection arises from an assumption that if consciousness does not exist by virtue of its own essence, it has no existence at all.
This objection is illogical, the text says:
If you say that the mind must exist because we remember our dream when we wake up, the same must be true of external objects.
For just as you can recall in terms of “I dreamed this,”
similar recollection exists for external objects as well.
If you say that the intrinsically real dreaming mind must exist because we remember our dream when we wake up, the same must be true for the objects of that dream, such as the elephants being perceived as external; they too would similarly exist.
Why is this so?
Because, just as you assert that mental consciousness exists because, when awakened, you can recall in terms of “I dreamed this” when I was dreaming, similar recollection exists for external objects that one has dreamed as well, in terms of “I saw this and that in my dream.”
Thus you are compelled to admit either that external objects exist as well or that even consciousness has no existence.
Since recollections of both the experience of a dream and the objects in it do exist even from our own standpoint, how does one understand their existence or nonexistence?
The Commentary mentions two aspects of recollection — remembering the experience of dreaming itself and remembering experiencing the objects of the dream.
So in the context of seeing elephants and so on in a dream, just as when one sees a reflection of a face in a mirror, the eye consciousness does not experience the face, but it still experiences an object — namely, the face’s reflection — in the same manner, even though there is no actual experience of an object in the sense of seeing a real elephant at the time of the dream, there is still an experience in the form of the perception of an elephant.
So although one might speak of “remembering the object,” what one actually remembers is the experience of perceiving such an object.
Differentiating between perceiving and experiencing as having distinct senses may be necessary in some specific contexts, but in numerous contexts such as the present one, there is no need for such distinction.
So the assertion that dependent nature devoid of external reality exists by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic cannot be sustained.
This is because no possible analogy could directly illustrate this; nor could there be analogies similar to those used in the proof of past and future lives — where although no direct example exists, illustrations can be made on the basis of providing a proof through a different syllogistic formulation.
One should understand that the arguments entailed in the refutation of Cittamātra are extremely powerful.
How the dream analogy does not establish nonexistence of external reality
You may say, "Since there is no visual cognition in sleep, no external object is seen, and thus mental cognition alone exists; it’s the aspects of the mind that are grasped as external."
"So as in dreams, it’s the same with waking life." You may say,
“If the body of an elephant and so on were to exist during dreams, then visual cognitions perceiving them would also be present while dreaming. This, however, is not correct.
Since there is no visual cognition present in dreams for the person who remains afflicted by sleep, no external object, such as the body of an elephant perceptible to visual cognition, is seen during dreams.
And thus in that state mental cognition alone exists.
Therefore no external reality such as a visible form exists at all, and it’s only the forms of external objects appearing as aspects of the mind that are ineluctably grasped as external.
So as in dreams, it’s the same with waking life, wherein mere cognitions emerge with no external objects at all.
To argue thus is to assert that, even if one grants that the dream analogy offered previously does not work, the dream example still establishes the existence of consciousness devoid of external reality.
Here the Commentary states, “This is incorrect because it is impossible for mental cognitions to emerge in dreams.”
The meaning of this statement is that even if we grant the absence of visible forms in a dream, a mental cognition existing by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic yet devoid of such content would be impossible even in a dream.
Candrakīrti is saying that the Cittamātra marries two things — the nonexistence of external reality and the intrinsic existence of mental cognitions — and therefore it cannot be a viable analogy.
Just as for you no external realities are born in a dream, no mental cognitions are born either;
so all three factors of perception — the eyes, their object, and the mind engendered by them — are fictitious. For the ears and the rest too, these three factors lack birth.
Just as for you no external objects or facts are born in a dream, no mental cognitions are intrinsically born either.
Thus, just as during the waking state when one perceives a form three things converge — the eyes, the visible form, and mental faculty — in the same manner, when one registers an object in a dream, it is through the convergence of three things that a cognition would perceive that object.
Also, just as the eyes as well as their object, the visible form, are not present in a dream state, the mind engendered by these two factors — namely, visual consciousness — also does not exist.
So all three factors of perception — the eyes (organ), the visible forms (object), and the mental faculty (antecedent condition) — are fictitious.
Just as for the eyes, these three factors lack intrinsically real birth for the ears and the rest too.
The Commentary says “the words ‘and the rest’ include from sound and auditory consciousness up to mental element and dharma element, as well as up to mental consciousness.”
So the four remaining physical sense organs, the four remaining sense objects, and the four remaining cognitions such as auditory consciousness all of these remain fictitious.
Even though they have no existence in the dream states, they appear as if they do, hence they are all false.
The three factors of mental cognition do exist during the dream state, but they still remain false, for they appear to possess intrinsic reality when they do not.
Those who take the presence of sensory consciousness in a dream state as representing master Candrakīrti’s position and then go about refuting it reveal excessive crudeness in the use of their intellect.
This is exactly like the saying “Letting the sun of refutation rise before the daybreak of opponent’s standpoint has arrived.”
So cast this kind of activity far away. Some Tibetans, while harboring pretensions of being great scholars, fail to comprehend even the rough outline of the positions of the great bodhisattvas who are most learned in philosophical matters such as these.
They thus relate to these masters as objects of continual accumulation of demerits and lead many others to such demerits.
So please be mindful.
Bhāviveka responds to Cittamātra’s positing of its own standpoint, as outlined in the lines “Since there is no visual cognition in sleep . . .”
by demonstrating how the opponent’s analogy remains unestablished.
He writes how in a dream state there do exist forms belonging to the class of mental objects, forms that are perceivable by mental consciousness, hence no instance of consciousness exists that has no object.
In critiquing this passage of Bhāviveka, Candrakīrti writes: This too is incorrect because the existence of all three factors remains utterly impossible in the dream state.
If you accept these three factors in the dream state for the sake of refuting the opponent’s standpoint, the dream analogy would in that case become meaningless.
If the dream has content that is not fictitious, then it cannot illustrate that the actual referent, the things, have the character of being false.
The meaning of the above statement is this: The intrinsic existence of objects, sense organs, and consciousnesses is totally impossible even in a dream state.
It is therefore illogical to say that in a dream state there exists a mental-object form that is an entity distinct from consciousness. This is how one should respond to the Cittamātra proposition.
Now the existence of such a form is something that one must also accept; there is no contradiction in maintaining that such form exists in the dream state.
So what becomes clear from the above exchange is that Bhāviveka accepts such a form in dream state to possess an intrinsic existence, while Candrakīrti’s passage argues against such existence.
If the intrinsic existence of a mental-object form were to be accepted because doing so could help refute Cittamātra’s dream analogy that purports to demonstrate consciousness without external reality, this would then make the Madhyamaka’s own use of the dream analogy to illustrate the absence of true existence of things meaningless.
For dream would then have content that is not fictitious and would itself exist by virtue of its intrinsic characteristic. This would then make it impossible to use the analogy of a dream to help establish the falsehood of the things that are the actual referents of such an analogy.
For as long as one does not reject intrinsic existence, it is impossible to relate the reason as well as the predicate to be proven to the example cited.
In view of all of these, the response we have presented above — that everything perceived in a dream lacks intrinsic existence — is far more excellent.
According to our own system, are those forms that are perceived vividly in dreams accepted as mental-object forms or not?
Since there is no sensory consciousness in a dream state, what appear as five sense objects are in fact being perceived only by mental consciousness. So although one cannot posit the presence of the five sense objects such as visible form, the objects of dreams are mental-object forms.
This is analogous to recognizing the vivid perceptions of skeletons in mental consciousness in meditative states as being mental-object forms.
Out of the five types of mental objects, dream objects belong to the category of imputed forms.
Through this analysis we should understand the status of many other similar facts.
How the dream analogy establishes all entities to be false.
Having established that dreams have no reality on the grounds that what appear as the three factors in a dream — object, sense organ, and consciousness — are all unreal, Candrakīrti, to demonstrate the unreality of all the other phenomena that have yet to be established as lacking true existence, states that even during the waking state, all phenomena are proven to lack intrinsic existence.
He writes: And as in dreams, here too in the waking state, phenomena are false and mind has no existence; there are no objects of experience and no senses either.
Just as the three factors — object, sense faculty, and consciousness — are false in dreams, phenomena are false here too in the waking state.
Therefore the mind [perceiving these phenomena] has no intrinsic existence.
Likewise, there are no objects of experience of the senses, such as form and so on, and no intrinsically arising senses either.
Thus it is stated in the sutra: Just as one perceives magically conjured animals, things though appearing do not exist in reality; they resemble illusions and are like dreams.
This truth has been shown by the Tathāgata.
Also: The beings of cyclic existence are dream-like: there is no birth nor death for anyone, and no “sentient,” “human,” or “life” can be found.
All these phenomena are like foam or a banana tree.
Statements such as these then become truly well-uttered insights.
The phrase “no birth for anyone” and so on should be understood just as in the case above, where the negation is expressed with the phrase “do not exist in reality.”
These sutra passages demonstrating all phenomena as lacking existence in actual reality fit well with the Madhyamaka standpoint but not with that of Cittamātra. This is why Candrakīrti states that these [sutra citations] become truly well-uttered insights.
So here, just as with the waking state, the three factors of dream exist until woken up — upon rousing, the three become no more.
So it is for those awakened from the sleep of delusion.
So here, with respect to people in the world, there are some who, though caught in ignorance’s sleep, are free from ordinary sleep in the sense of being awake.
Nothing arises for them through its own essence, but within the dream-like perspective of ignorance’s sleep, all three factors do exist intrinsically for them.
Just as with the waking state, for someone who is asleep, as long as they remain in that state and until woken up, the three factors of dream continue to exist.
Yet, upon rousing from sleep, the three things of his dream become no more.
So it is for the buddhas who, having awakened from, or eradicated, the sleep of delusion in its entirety, have actualized the ultimate expanse of reality; for them all three factors no longer exist at all.
So consciousness in the absence of external reality has no existence at all.
This said, it is from within the perspective of a buddha’s seeing the way things really are (emptiness) that the three factors are not perceived.
As for his seeing things in their diversity (conventional truth), although no perception arises from the buddha’s mind being infected by the propensities of ignorance, it does know these three factors through perceiving what appears to sentient beings whose minds are thus afflicted.
Refuting the analogy of seeing floating hairs
If Cittamātra asserts, “Those with myodesopsia perceive floating hairs and so on that do not actually exist.
Similarly, even though no external reality exists, consciousness does exist by virtue of its intrinsic nature.” This too is untenable.
Why is this so?
Candrakīrti writes: The cognition of one suffering from defective sight perceives floating hair because of his malady.
For such cognition, both floating hair and its perception are true; for those who have clear sight, both these things are false. If cognition exists without the cognized, one should see floating hair even without the malady that makes the eyes see such things. This is not the case, and so no such cognition exists.
The cognition of one suffering from defective eyesight perceives floating hair because of his malady.
Now for such cognition of the person, both visual perception and its object, the floating hair, are true.
Yet from the perspective of those who have clear sight — those whose vision has not been affected by such a malady — both these things, what appear as floating hair as well as the cognition that perceives it, are false; both are unborn.
For without an object, even a merely appearing one, it would be difficult to posit the existence of cognition.
However, this is exactly what the opponent will have to admit.
If one does not admit and asserts that even without the cognized floating hair, intrinsically real cognition perceiving floating hair does exist for someone affected with myodesopsia, in that case, one should see floating hair even without the malady — the defect that makes the eyes see such things as floating hair.
For they are both exactly equal insofar as nonexistence of their objects are concerned.
This argument is similar to the one where it’s demonstrated that if something arises from an intrinsically real other, it must then do so from everything else that is other.
Here too, if something arises from an intrinsically real consciousness, the nonexistence of floating hair being equal, one cannot maintain that someone with an eye malady sees floating hair while the perception of floating hair does not arise in someone free of such a malady.
This is because, with the implication that such a cognition seeing floating hair does not depend on the presence of the eye malady, we can force the consequence that these two will be totally unrelated to each other.
So since it is not the case that cognition of floating hair arises without such an eye malady, no such intrinsically real cognition in the absence of external reality exists at all.
Refuting the referent, the arising of consciousness devoid of external reality through the potency of the propensities
This has three parts: refuting the view that cognitions of external reality arise or do not from maturation or its lack, refuting the opponent’s restatement that consciousness without external reality exists, and how refuting the Cittamātra standpoint does not contradict the scriptures.
Refuting the view that cognitions of external reality arise or do not from maturation or its lack
The first has two parts: stating the opponent’s position and refuting that position.
Stating the opponent’s position
Now if you assert that such perceptions do not occur in those who have clear sight because the potentiality has not matured, it’s not merely that the cognizable objects do not exist.
If asked, “What is it then?” “
It is the maturation or the lack of maturation of the potencies, the propensities imprinted on one’s consciousness in the past, that causes the arising or nonarising of such cognitions.
Thus the only person who will perceive floating hair is someone whose propensities imprinted by past perceptions of floating hair have come to mature.
Now if you assert that such perceptions as that of floating hair do not occur in those who have clear sight and have no eye malady because the potentiality or the propensity for perceiving floating hairs has not matured in such persons, then it’s not merely that such cognitions do not arise because the cognizable objects, the floating hairs, do not exist.
Refuting that position
This has three parts: refuting the intrinsic existence of potentiality in present cognition, refuting the intrinsic existence of potentiality in future cognition, and refuting the intrinsic existence of potentiality in past cognition.
Refuting the intrinsic existence of potentiality in present cognition
But such potential does not exist, so this cognition is not established.
Potentiality cannot exist for what is already arisen; for what is not yet arisen too, there can be no potentiality.
If there were an intrinsically existent potentiality, one might allow for the possibility of the occurrence or nonoccurrence of cognitions on the basis of the maturation or the absence of maturation of such a potentiality.
But such inherently established potential does not exist, so this cognition you assert to be intrinsically real is not established.
How is it that it is not established?
When you conceive of such potentiality, is it associated with the present cognition?
Alternatively, is it connected with past cognition or future cognition?
Now for what is already arisen — that is, present cognition — no such intrinsically real potentiality is possible; such a thing cannot exist.
For what is not yet arisen, the future, too, there can be no such potentiality.
For instance, when one asserts potentiality in present cognition, the cognition and the potentiality would exist simultaneously.
In that case, if the relationship between the potentiality and its bearer is represented by the sixth genitive case as the “cognition’s potency,” the two cannot be separate entities.
Yet the potent cognition cannot be the same as the potentiality itself, for if it were, then the effect would have no cause distinct from the effect itself.
Furthermore, even when the sprout is born, the seed would persist without disintegrating.
If, however, the relationship between the potentiality and its bearer is represented by the fifth ablative case as “cognition from potentiality,” it would be incorrect to assert that cognition already arisen emerges from a potentiality that is contemporaneous to it.
For there would be the consequence that the effect would already exist at the time of the cause.
So the so-called potentiality, the purported cause of the cognition, does not exist in the present cognition.
Refuting the intrinsic existence of potentiality in future cognition
Without the qualifier there can be no qualified, otherwise even a barren woman’s son could have such potential.
If you speak of potentiality because consciousness will emerge,
there will be no cognition since there is now no potential. “ Things that exist through mutual dependence have no true existence.” So the sublime ones have taught. Now if [you contend that] the potentiality exists in the not yet arisen cognition, there is the following analysis.
When we relate the two terms in the phrase “potentiality of cognition,” potentiality is the qualified and cognition the qualifier.
However, when it comes to the future or not yet arisen cognition, one cannot characterize it in positive terms as “cognition,” nor can it be characterized in negative terms as “noncognition” in the sense of something with intrinsic existence.
Furthermore, since future cognition does not exist in the present as cognition, how can one qualify such potentiality in terms of “this potentiality is of this cognition”? This is not possible.
So without the qualifier, the “cognition,” there can be no qualified, the “potentiality.”
Otherwise, there would be the consequence that even a barren woman’s son could have such potential!
Thinking of a specific cognition that may emerge from its potentiality, might assert: “When we say, ‘This is the potentiality of this cognition, and it’s from this potentiality that this cognition will emerge,’ the two become qualifier and qualified.
For example, in worldly convention, one uses imperatives like ‘Cook the rice’ and ‘Weave a cloth from this thread’ on the basis of imagining the cooked rice or woven cloth.
In the Treasury of Abhidharma too, when the author writes, ‘The womb-born is threefold: the universal monarch and the two self-arisen ones,’ he is speaking of someone entering the womb who will become a universal monarch.
So here, too, we are speaking of potentiality of cognition because we are thinking of the consciousness that will emerge.
This rejoinder too is pointless.
If something does have existence on occasion, then at some point in time, such an effect will come into being.
In contrast, things that will never come into being — the son of a barren woman or unconditioned space, for example — will come into being neither in the present nor at any subsequent point in time.
So although one might accept the occurrence of cognition if intrinsically real potencies do exist, given that no such intrinsically real future cognition exists at any time, the potentiality that produces such cognition does not exist at all.
Therefore, just like the son of a barren woman, since there is now no intrinsically real potential producing cognition, there will be no occurrence of intrinsically real cognition.
In numerous instances of Madhyamaka’s refutation of the sprout arising by virtue of its own characteristic, consequences like the following are leveled: “If the sprout can arise even though it does not exist at the time of its seed, then such things as the horn of a rabbit too could come into being.”
The significance of hurling such extreme absurd consequences is this: An intrinsically existing sprout, if it lacks existence at any particular point of time, would have no existence at all at any time.
Such a sprout would thus be indistinguishable from something with no existence whatsoever.
This is the point. It’s patently not the case that, in general, if the sprout can arise even though it is not present at the time of its cause, then the horn of a rabbit can also come into being.
Through this reasoning, such examples as the cooked rice are explained.
For if things do come into being through their intrinsic natures then potential things such as cooked rice would become totally nonexistent.
Furthermore, perhaps you the opponent say that “It’s in relation to the potential emerging cognition that its potentiality is posited, and similarly, it is in relation to such potentiality that cognition is posited.
Hence the two things exist through mutual dependence.”
Reply: This is exactly why the sublime ones taught that cognitions have no intrinsic or true existence.
In the Commentary, Candrakīrti states that relational existents like “long and short,” “here and there,” and so on exist as imputed constructs and that they lack existence through intrinsic nature.
Therefore one should understand that it is not existence in general that is being negated in relation to these things; rather it is their intrinsic existence that is being rejected. This distinction must be understood.
Now if you Cittamātra speak in such terms of relationality, you are then actually following our discourse.
In short, such potentiality does not exist even in the future cognition.
Refuting the intrinsic existence of potentiality in past cognition
Now to explain how such potentiality does not exist in past cognition as well, it reads: If consciousness arises from the maturing of potentiality already past, it will have then emerged from a potential extraneous to itself.
And since the moments of this continuum would be alien to each other, anything and everything could emerge from anything.
If it is from the maturing of potentiality already past — such as a specific potentiality imprinted on foundation consciousness by cognition as it was ceasing, a potentiality for the production of a commensurate effect — that future consciousness arises, then an intrinsically distinct effect will have emerged from a potential that is an intrinsically extraneous cause.
Why is this so?
Since the moments of this continuum emerge in a sequence, the preceding and subsequent members in the continuum would for you be alien to each other by virtue of their own intrinsic natures.
The root for the Sanskrit word for a continuum is tan, and it is stated “continuum refers to ‘extend,’” and by applying an affix to this verbal root, there emerges the sense of “transmitting,” hence “continuum” (tantra).
So through the formation of a continuum, causes and effects operate in a related sequence like the flow of a stream, and the continuity of birth and death remains without any intervals of disruption.
It is just such a momentary phenomenon, composed of three temporal stages and persisting from past to future, that is called continuum.
Since the individual moments are its constitutive parts, the continuum itself is a whole, the bearer of the parts, and not merely the absence of interruption between the preceding and subsequent moments.
Furthermore, since the continuum encompasses all its parts, the individual moments within the continuum are referred to as “moments of the continuum.”
Similarly, because the constituents or the parts of the continuum belong to the continuum, the continuum is referred to also as the “appropriator of these members.”
A “vase,” for example, is the appropriator of the lip, neck, and so on of that vase.
According to the opponent, such preceding and subsequent moments in a continuum are distinct from each other, and their distinctness exists by virtue of their intrinsic natures.
This means that from a potentiality that is intrinsically distinct can emerge something that is intrinsically separate from it.
Now if you, the opponent, were to think: “Since I do accept this consequence, there is no fault here,” then anything and everything other than itself could emerge from anything.
You may say that though these moments are distinct, they have no separate continua, so therefore the objection does not apply. But this thesis is unproven. For such a single shared continuum is untenable.
Attributes of Maitreya and Upagupta, who are distinct, cannot belong to a single continuum. Things different from each other through intrinsic characteristics could not logically be part of a single continuum.
You may say that though these individual moments in a continuum — in which the successive moments function in a temporal sequence — are distinct from each other by virtue of their intrinsic nature, these sequential moments have no separate continua. They all share a single continuum.
So therefore the objection that everything can originate from everything else does not apply. This assertion that the successive moments share a single continuum is also the core of the opponent’s rebuttal against Madhyamaka refutation of arising from other.
It may be that if a single shared continuum can be established for two temporally sequential moments that exist as intrinsically separate entities, the fault charged might not hold.
But since existence of such a shared single continuum has not been established, this thesis is unproven.
How is this so?
For such a single shared continuum is untenable for preceding and subsequent moments of things that are different from each other through intrinsic characteristics.
For example, when one speaks of the attributes of Maitreya and Upagupta, who are distinct persons, they cannot belong to a single shared continuum.
Similarly, intrinsically separate temporally sequential moments could not logically be part of a single shared continuum.
When understood thus, we can see that the essential point here is how the opponent’s defense — that a rice seed and its sprout share the same continuum but not a rice seed and a barley sprout so the absurd consequence that “everything can originate from everything else” will not ensue — fails to rebuff our objections precisely because the opponent asserts intrinsic separateness of things.
It’s crystal clear that the objection is not against mere otherness.
So some who use the approach of knocking over the first domino, failing to understand that what is being negated is being qualified in terms of the phrase “intrinsically existing other,” they leave aside Candrakīrti’s own explanation of how the opponent cannot rebuff our objection and conjure their own fantasy explanation, something Candrakīrti hasn’t stated at all.
To do this is to sully Candrakīrti’s perfect philosophical system. Refuting the opponent’s restatement that consciousness without external reality exists.
This has two parts: stating the opponent’s position and refuting that position.
Stating the opponent’s position.
Having presented their standpoints thus far, with the view of still achieving their aim, the Cittamātra may once again assert their own standpoint.
The arising of visual perception takes place from its own potentiality wholly and at once.
This potentiality, which is the basis of such consciousness, is what is termed ‘the physical eye organ.’
The arising of visual perception or consciousness takes place on the basis of its own potentiality, which exists in the form of an imprint placed on the foundation consciousness, a potentiality that has been imprinted by another consciousness, wholly and at once, while it is ceasing.
It is from the maturing of such potentiality that an eye consciousness that resembles a previous visual cognition later arises.
And this uninterrupted continuum of potentiality, which is the basis of such eye consciousness, is what is termed by worldly people because of their ignorance as “the physical eye organ.”
In actuality, no eye organ exists that is distinct from consciousness.
One can extend this point to the other physical sense organs as well.
In this view, the propensity that is the cause for the arising of eye consciousness is its causal condition, while the eye faculty is its dominant condition.
The statement made here of the eye faculty being an immediate cause of visual cognition should be understood in relation not to just any eye faculty but to those where the propensities for the arising of visual cognition have matured.
In connection with this, Differentiation of the Middle and Extremes says: Perceptions of objects, of sentience, and of self — cognitions perceiving these do arise, yet no external objects exist.
The statement that perceptions of objects (form and so on) and sentience (the five sense faculties) do arise is a reference to foundation consciousness. The master Sthiramati, in commenting on this passage, also explains the physical sense organs as objects of foundation consciousness.
So according to the Cittamātra school, which accepts foundation consciousness, what appears as physical sense faculties to foundation consciousness is the eye organ and so on.
Having thus shown how there exist no faculties of the eyes and so on separate from consciousness,
Cittamātra states the following to demonstrate that even material forms do not exist as separate from consciousness: You say, “Not knowing that perceptions emerging from the senses — such as the simple perception of blue — come from their own seeds with nothing outer to grasp, people speak of apprehending external objects.
"So just as in dreams, in waking states too, the mind exists with no external reality."
You say that perceptions emerging from the five senses — such as the simple perception of blue — come from the maturing of their own seeds imprinted on foundation consciousness, with nothing outer, like a blue object, to grasp.
Not knowing this, however, worldly people speak of apprehending external objects in place of consciousness and accordingly cling to them as such.